---
title: "![](/Users/sigrunshepherd/Git/Tenebrous-Dragon/13thAgeShare/media/image1.jpeg){width=\"8.5in\"
  height=\"11.333333333333334in\"}"
---

# Monsters

You can use the monsters included in the *13th Age* Archmage Engine,
or you can make your own.

## Monster Rules

### Stats & Characteristics

Most monster attacks generally deal a specific amount of damage (instead
of rolling for damage) and don't add on the escalation die. Only
exceptional monsters get to add the escalation die to their attacks.

Monsters may have particular abilities or powers that are triggered when
the attack roll is greater than a certain threshold. The default trigger
happens at a 16+ monster d20 attack roll, though unpredictable monsters
may have effects trigger on other rolls.

#### Mooks

Mooks are weaker monsters that can be cut down in large numbers in a
single turn. Damage is not tracked against single mooks, but against the
entire mob of mooks you're facing. If you roll damage against a mook and
it is greater than the single mook's hit points, then another mook takes
the remainder. In this way, damage can cascade to multiple mooks, and a
player can kill multiple in one turn, even if they're not all directly
within your attack range.

A mook's hit point value is one-fifth that of a regular monster.

Mooks move and attack individually. Mooks deal a fixed damage when they
hit, and double damage when they roll a natural 20.

Mooks can be split up into multiple mobs with different initiative
numbers and hit point pools for each.

#### Large & Huge Monsters

Large monsters generally have twice the hit points and deal roughly
double the damage of a normal-sized monster. They also count as two
monsters when you build a battle.

Huge monsters have triple the hit points, deal triple damage and count
as three normal-sized monsters when you're putting together a battle.

Regular-sized monsters may also have the same stats as large and huge
monsters, in which case they are labeled as double-strength and
triple-strength monsters, respectively.

#### Dire Animals

Dire animals are bigger (large-sized) versions of normal animals. Dire
animals usually have at least one dire feature, determined randomly
using the table below.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d6   Dire Feature   Description
  ---- -------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  1    Armor plates Add +2 to the dire animal's AC, and add +1 to its PD.

  2    Spiky bits     Whenever an enemy hits the dire animal with a melee
                      attack, deal damage equal to twice the animal's level
                      to that attacker.

  3    Carnage        The dire animal's attacks that miss deal damage equal
                      to its level. When staggered, its missed attacks deal
                      damage equal to double its level.

  4    Poison         The dire animal's main attack also deals 5 ongoing
                      poison damage per a tier (5 ongoing poison at levels
                      1--4, 10 at 5--7, etc.).

  5    Dire           When the escalation die is even, this animal heals
       regeneration   damage equal to triple its level at the start of its
                      turn.

  6    Fury           While staggered, the dire animal gains a +2 attack
                      bonus and deals +4 damage, but at the end of each of
                      its turns it takes 2d6 damage.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Abilities

Monsters may have special abilities for use in battle.

#### Burrowing

Burrowing is a special rule for monsters that allows somewhat restricted
movement underground. Unless otherwise specified, monsters generally do
not leave functional tunnels behind them when burrowing.

A burrowing creature on the surface may attempt to burrow underground by
using a standard action. Burrowing is successful if a saving throw beats
the required save for the type of ground.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Type of Ground                       Difficulty       Save Needed
  ------------------------------------ ---------------- -----------------
  Sand, dirt, forest soil              Easy             6+

  Hard-packed dirt, loose rocks        Normal save      11+

  Rock, caves, dungeon floors          Hard save        16+
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

After successfully burrowing, a creature may move underground, faster or
slower depending on the hardness of the ground, out of sight of other
creatures, hidden and safe from attacks.

For breaking through to the surface, the sequence is as follows: a move
action from deeper under the ground to come close to the surface, close
enough that people see there's something coming, followed by a quick
action to break through, and then by a standard action attack.

#### Death Attacks and Last Gasp Saves

Some deadly monsters have a special attack called a *death attack* that
can kill (petrify, paralyze, liquefy, immolate) in a single attack. Such
attacks offer the player a *last gasp save*.

A player that is affected by a death attack has a limited amount of last
gasp saves to try to throw off the condition of the death attack. On the
first turn a player is affected, the player may make a single action
(standard, move, or quick), after which they must roll a hard save
(16+). If successful, the player shrugs off the death attack condition
and can act normally on their next turn. If unsuccessful, their turn
ends and the player is now helpless and cannot take any other actions on
future turns except for further last gasp saves. Each successive last
gasp save is a hard save (16+). A successful save means that the player
can act normally on the next round, unless the player rolls a natural 20
for their last gasp save, which means that the player can take their
turn normally in the current round.

Once a player fails four last gasp saves while fighting off the death
attack, the death attack effect succeeds, and the player is adversely
affected as the attack indicates.

An ally may assist a player affected by a death attack. The ally must
use a standard action to help the player shake off the attack. This
gives the player a free last gasp save that may be rolled immediately.
(A failure doesn't count against the four allowed saves.) In addition,
the assisted save becomes normal difficulty (11+) instead of hard.

#### Fear

Some monsters may have an aura of fear that makes them more difficult to
be attacked.

A character engaged with such a monster must have a certain amount of
hit points (according to the level of the monster with the fear aura) or
be dazed (-4 attack) and gain no benefit from the escalation die.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Level              Fear threshold (HP)
  ------------------ ----------------------------------------------------
  0                  7

  1                  9

  2                  12

  3                  15

  4                  18

  5                  24

  6                  30

  7                  36

  8                  48

  9                  60

  10                 72

  11                 96

  12                 120

  13                 144

  14                 192
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

Should the character's hp increase past the fear threshold or the
character disengage from the monster, they lose the dazed effect and
regain the escalation die benefits.

### Group Abilities

A few monsters have limited abilities that can be used a certain number
of times in a battle for the group. Any monster within that group may
use the ability, but then the number of available uses is decremented
for the entire group. It does not matter which monster uses the ability.

Mooks cannot have group abilities.

### Leveling Up

Use these guidelines to raise an existing monster by one or more levels.

1.  Raise its attack bonuses and defenses by 1 per added level.

2.  For damage, hp, and related special abilities (like healing),
    multiply the monster's stats accordingly:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Levels Added                   Damage Multiplier
  ------------------------------ ----------------------------------------
  +1 level                       x 1.25

  +2 levels                      x 1.6

  +3 levels                      x 2.0

  +4 levels                      x 2.5

  +5 levels                      x 3.2

  +6 levels                      x 4.0
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

## Monster List

This list is sorted by level, then role, then monster name.

  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Lvl   Monster                        Size       Role      Type
  ----- ------------------------------ ---------- --------- ------------------
  0     kobold grand wizard            normal     mook      humanoid

  0     squib swarm                    normal     mook      beast

  0     stirgelings                    normal     mook      beast

  0     fast xombie                    normal     spoiler   aberration

  0     giant ant                      normal     troop     beast

  0     stirge                         normal     troop     beast

  1     archer stirge                  normal     archer    beast

  1     skeleton archer                normal     archer    undead

  1     cobbler stirge                 normal     blocker   beast

  1     skeletal hound                 normal     blocker   undead

  1     dainty lizard                  normal     mook      beast

  1     decrepit skeleton              normal     mook      undead

  1     dire rat                       normal     mook      beast

  1     ettercap acolyte               normal     mook      humanoid

  1     goblin scum                    normal     mook      humanoid

  1     gravemeat                      normal     mook      undead

  1     kobold archer                  normal     mook      humanoid

  1     meteorite xombie               normal     mook      aberration

  1     wibble                         normal     mook      construct

  1     zombie shuffler                normal     mook      undead

  1     rat swarm                      normal     spoiler   beast

  1     swarm of bats                  normal     spoiler   beast

  1     eidolon in humanoid form       3×         troop     spirit

  1     fungaloid creeper              normal     troop     plant

  1     goblin grunt                   normal     troop     humanoid

  1     human thug                     normal     troop     humanoid

  1     kobold warrior                 normal     troop     humanoid

  1     orc warrior                    normal     troop     humanoid

  1     venomous snake                 normal     troop     beast

  1     watch skull                    normal     troop     undead

  1     white dragon hatchling         normal     troop     dragon

  1     wolf                           normal     troop     beast

  1     badger                         normal     wrecker   beast

  1     giant scorpion                 normal     wrecker   beast

  2     orcish archer                  normal     archer    humanoid

  2     protector icon warrior         normal     archer    humanoid

  2     splotchcap                     normal     archer    humanoid

  2     enduring shield                normal     blocker   humanoid

  2     ettercap hunter                normal     blocker   humanoid

  2     giant web spider               large      blocker   beast

  2     hook scuttler                  normal     blocker   beast

  2     avenging orb                   normal     caster    humanoid

  2     feral warbanner                2×         caster    construct

  2     goblin shaman                  normal     caster    humanoid

  2     kobold hero                    normal     leader    humanoid

  2     orc shaman                     normal     leader    humanoid

  2     aerial spore                   normal     mook      plant

  2     bloody shade                   2×         mook      undead

  2     bone imp mage-eater            weakling   mook      demon

  2     broken shade                   normal     mook      undead

  2     coin zombie                    normal     mook      undead

  2     conglomerate                   normal     mook      elemental

  2     demonic icon fanatic           normal     mook      humanoid

  2     frogspawn grunt                normal     mook      humanoid

  2     human rabble                   normal     mook      humanoid

  2     jackal gravewrecker            normal     mook      humanoid

  2     kobold skyclaw                 normal     mook      humanoid

  2     newly-risen ghoul              normal     mook      undead

  2     pit-spawn orc                  2×         mook      humanoid

  2     razor shark                    normal     mook      beast

  2     undead icon cultist            normal     mook      humanoid

  2     xombie egg spawn               normal     mook      aberration

  2     claw flower                    normal     spoiler   plant

  2     faun troubadour                normal     spoiler   humanoid

  2     hellwasp                       normal     spoiler   beast

  2     sadsack                        normal     spoiler   undead

  2     skull crab xombie              normal     spoiler   aberration

  2     trog                           normal     spoiler   humanoid

  2     wood nymph (dryad)             2×         spoiler   humanoid

  2     ankheg                         large      troop     beast

  2     bear                           normal     troop     beast

  2     blueflame salamander           huge       troop     elemental

  2     boombug                        normal     troop     beast

  2     bugbear scout                  2×         troop     humanoid

  2     dire bat                       normal     troop     beast

  2     hobgoblin warrior              normal     troop     humanoid

  2     human zombie                   normal     troop     undead

  2     medium brass dragon            normal     troop     dragon

  2     medium white dragon            normal     troop     dragon

  2     orc berserker                  normal     troop     humanoid

  2     sahuagin raider                normal     troop     humanoid

  2     skeleton warrior               normal     troop     undead

  2     skin devil                     weakling   troop     devil

  2     wererat                        normal     troop     beast

  2     zombie beast                   large      troop     undead

  2     bat cavalry                    large      wrecker   beast & humanoid

  2     destroying sword               normal     wrecker   humanoid

  2     hunting spider                 normal     wrecker   beast

  2     lizardman savage               normal     wrecker   humanoid

  2     sporrior                       normal     wrecker   plant

  2     swarming maw                   normal     wrecker   beast

  3     archer shade                   normal     archer    undead

  3     bone imp archer                normal     archer    demon

  3     city minotaur guard            large      archer    humanoid

  3     gnoll ranger                   normal     archer    humanoid

  3     greenscale wild stalker        normal     archer    humanoid

  3     ettercap warrior               normal     blocker   humanoid

  3     ogre penitent                  large      blocker   giant

  3     otyugh                         large      blocker   aberration

  3     small water elemental          normal     blocker   elemental

  3     taranar coryphée               large      blocker   elemental

  3     xombie spiders                 normal     blocker   aberration

  3     blue sorcerer                  normal     caster    humanoid

  3     drow spider-mage               normal     caster    humanoid

  3     ettercap supplicant            normal     caster    humanoid

  3     vicious warbanner              2×         caster    construct

  3     zealous warbanner              2×         caster    construct

  3     bugbear schemer                normal     leader    humanoid

  3     demonic icon priest            normal     leader    humanoid

  3     kobold engineer                normal     leader    humanoid

  3     orc battle screamer            normal     leader    humanoid

  3     pixie pod                      2×         leader    plant

  3     protector icon priest          normal     leader    humanoid

  3     trog chanter                   normal     leader    humanoid

  3     cave orc                       normal     mook      humanoid

  3     dretch                         normal     mook      demon

  3     fallen derro                   normal     mook      humanoid

  3     fire bat                       normal     mook      beast

  3     kobold berserker               normal     mook      humanoid

  3     lemure                         normal     mook      devil

  3     lesser haunting                normal     mook      undead

  3     podling                        normal     mook      plant

  3     protector icon cultist         2×         mook      humanoid

  3     the rascal                     normal     mook      humanoid

  3     weaver swarm                   normal     mook      beast

  3     bone imp tormentor             normal     spoiler   demon

  3     dawn zorigami                  normal     spoiler   construct

  3     death-plague orc               large      spoiler   humanoid

  3     frogspawn monk                 normal     spoiler   humanoid

  3     ghoul                          normal     spoiler   undead

  3     goblin bat mage                normal     spoiler   beast & humanoid

  3     imp                            normal     spoiler   demon

  3     intellect devourer             normal     spoiler   aberration

  3     pixie warrior                  normal     spoiler   humanoid

  3     river nymph (naiad)            2×         spoiler   humanoid

  3     rust monster                   normal     spoiler   aberration

  3     slime-skull                    normal     spoiler   undead

  3     snowy owlbear                  large      spoiler   beast

  3     spinneret doxy                 normal     spoiler   humanoid

  3     attached eidolon               normal     troop     spirit

  3     barbellite                     normal     troop     beast

  3     blade shade                    normal     troop     undead

  3     bugbear                        normal     troop     humanoid

  3     cenotaph dragon                normal     troop     dragon

  3     clubtail                       large      troop     beast

  3     derro berserker                normal     troop     humanoid

  3     dire wolf                      large      troop     beast

  3     drudge citizen                 normal     troop     undead

  3     fungaloid drudge               normal     troop     plant

  3     gnoll savage                   normal     troop     humanoid

  3     kobold dog-rider               normal     troop     humanoid

  3     large brass dragon             large      troop     dragon

  3     ogre                           large      troop     giant

  3     orc tusker                     normal     troop     humanoid

  3     really angry kobold            normal     troop     humanoid

  3     small earth elemental          normal     troop     elemental

  3     small fire elemental           normal     troop     elemental

  3     snowy owlbear cub              normal     troop     beast

  3     werewolf                       normal     troop     beast

  3     bonded hero                    3×         wrecker   construct

  3     braincap                       2×         wrecker   plant

  3     catacomb dragon                large      wrecker   dragon

  3     flamebird phoenix              2×         wrecker   elemental

  3     gray hoarder                   2×         wrecker   undead

  3     great cat                      normal     wrecker   beast

  3     hellhound                      normal     wrecker   beast

  3     horned azinth calf             2×         wrecker   beast

  3     hungry star                    normal     wrecker   aberration

  3     magma brute                    normal     wrecker   construct

  3     medium black dragon            normal     wrecker   dragon

  3     medium bronze dragon           normal     wrecker   dragon

  3     ochre jelly                    large      wrecker   ooze

  3     red haze berserker             normal     wrecker   humanoid

  3     redcap                         normal     wrecker   humanoid

  3     small air elemental            normal     wrecker   elemental

  3     wild dryad                     2×         wrecker   elemental

  4     derro whisperer                normal     archer    humanoid

  4     faun harrier                   normal     archer    humanoid

  4     doomlantern salamander         huge       blocker   elemental

  4     flesh golem                    large      blocker   construct

  4     gelatinous tetrahedron         huge       blocker   ooze

  4     ghoul licklash                 normal     blocker   undead

  4     kobold bravescale              normal     blocker   humanoid

  4     bluescale lightning caller     normal     caster    humanoid

  4     brain-absorber xombie          large      caster    aberration

  4     deathly warbanner              2×         caster    construct

  4     demonic icon wizard            normal     caster    humanoid

  4     derro sage                     normal     caster    humanoid

  4     despoiler                      normal     caster    demon

  4     kobold dungeon-shaman          2×         caster    humanoid

  4     sprite                         normal     caster    humanoid

  4     the purple dragon (adventurer) huge       caster    dragon

  4     derro seer                     normal     leader    humanoid

  4     ettercap keeper                normal     leader    humanoid

  4     frogspawn spellcroaker         normal     leader    humanoid

  4     fungaloid monarch              2×         leader    plant

  4     gnoll war leader               normal     leader    humanoid

  4     hobgoblin captain              normal     leader    humanoid

  4     lethal lothario                normal     leader    humanoid

  4     awakened trees                 normal     mook      plant

  4     cambion dirk                   normal     mook      demon

  4     chaos glorp                    normal     mook      aberration

  4     drow soldier                   normal     mook      humanoid

  4     elder spore                    normal     mook      plant

  4     kelplet                        normal     mook      plant

  4     kobold shadow-warrior          normal     mook      humanoid

  4     ravenous cannibal              normal     mook      humanoid

  4     the woven                      normal     mook      humanoid

  4     zombie of the silver rose      normal     mook      undead

  4     chaos behemoth                 huge       spoiler   aberration

  4     demonic ogre                   large      spoiler   giant

  4     ghoul pusbuster                normal     spoiler   undead

  4     giant bird of prey             normal     spoiler   beast

  4     gibbering mouther              normal     spoiler   aberration

  4     harpy                          normal     spoiler   humanoid

  4     hell imp                       normal     spoiler   devil

  4     hill nymph (oread)             2×         spoiler   humanoid

  4     jest bones                     normal     spoiler   undead

  4     kobold assassin                normal     spoiler   humanoid

  4     lich baroness                  normal     spoiler   undead

  4     medium copper dragon           normal     spoiler   dragon

  4     medium green dragon            normal     spoiler   dragon

  4     shadow mongoose destroyer of   normal     spoiler   spirit
        fate                                                

  4     taranar hunter                 large      spoiler   elemental

  4     wight                          normal     spoiler   undead

  4     azer soldier                   normal     troop     dwarf

  4     beautific gargoyle             normal     troop     construct

  4     blackamber skeletal            normal     troop     undead
        legionnaire                                         

  4     bonded veil                    3×         troop     construct

  4     bone imp skullbiter            normal     troop     demon

  4     broken taranar                 large      troop     elemental

  4     centaur lancer                 normal     troop     humanoid

  4     chaos beast                    normal     troop     aberration

  4     chuulish slave                 normal     troop     aberration

  4     demon drake                    normal     troop     demon

  4     derro maniac                   normal     troop     humanoid

  4     dire bear                      large      troop     beast

  4     ebon gauntlet sword            normal     troop     humanoid

  4     eidolon in war form            3×         troop     spirit

  4     ember imp                      normal     troop     devil

  4     half-orc legionnaire           normal     troop     humanoid

  4     honey devil, aka slime devil   weakling   troop     devil

  4     huge brass dragon              huge       troop     dragon

  4     large white dragon             large      troop     dragon

  4     lesser xorn                    elite      troop     elemental

  4     minotaur                       large      troop     humanoid

  4     ogre crusader                  large      troop     giant

  4     phantomaton                    normal     troop     undead

  4     screaming skull                normal     troop     undead

  4     trihorn                        large      troop     beast

  4     troll                          large      troop     giant

  4     wereboar                       2×         troop     beast

  4     barbarous bugbear              normal     wrecker   humanoid

  4     basilisk                       large      wrecker   beast

  4     big zombie                     large      wrecker   undead

  4     chaos brute                    large      wrecker   aberration

  4     fungaloid empress              huge       wrecker   plant

  4     ghoul fleshripper              normal     wrecker   undead

  4     ogre berserker                 large      wrecker   giant

  4     owlbear                        large      wrecker   beast

  4     slaughter pit shade            large      wrecker   undead

  4     spiketail                      large      wrecker   beast

  5     demon-touched human ranger     normal     archer    humanoid

  5     jackal scout                   normal     archer    humanoid

  5     star-mask cultist              normal     archer    aberration

  5     thunder bat                    normal     archer    beast

  5     earth elemental                normal     blocker   elemental

  5     faun keeper                    normal     blocker   humanoid

  5     frog knight                    normal     blocker   humanoid

  5     gelatinous cubahedron          huge       blocker   ooze

  5     gelatinous cube                huge       blocker   ooze

  5     hungry mouth ghost             normal     blocker   undead

  5     water elemental                normal     blocker   elemental

  5     flaming skull                  normal     caster    undead

  5     hobgoblin warmage              normal     caster    humanoid

  5     kohwa messenger                large      caster    beast

  5     manticore bard                 large      caster    beast

  5     medium blue dragon             normal     caster    dragon

  5     minotaur adept                 large      caster    humanoid

  5     petulant never-was             2×         caster    undead

  5     sahuagin glow priest           normal     caster    humanoid

  5     taranar bugler                 large      caster    elemental

  5     faun bandleader                normal     leader    humanoid

  5     resurgent phoenix              large      leader    elemental

  5     swaysong naga                  large      leader    beast

  5     whispering prophet             normal     leader    aberration

  5     fomorian brute                 large      mook      giant

  5     jackal bearer                  normal     mook      humanoid

  5     jackpot zombie                 normal     mook      undead

  5     kobold glinter                 normal     mook      humanoid

  5     scuttling star-mask            normal     mook      aberration

  5     sea shark                      2×         mook      beast

  5     binding bride                  normal     spoiler   humanoid

  5     common treant                  normal     spoiler   plant

  5     earthshaker                    huge       spoiler   beast

  5     frogspawn deceiver             normal     spoiler   humanoid

  5     gorge dragon                   large      spoiler   dragon

  5     great horned owlbear           large      spoiler   beast

  5     mantikumhar                    large      spoiler   beast

  5     rust monster obliterator       normal     spoiler   demon

  5     sea nymph (nereid)             2×         spoiler   humanoid

  5     swarm prince                   normal     spoiler   humanoid

  5     trog fouler                    normal     spoiler   humanoid

  5     wild naiad                     2×         spoiler   elemental

  5     wraith                         normal     spoiler   undead

  5     cambion sickle                 normal     troop     demon

  5     dire boar                      large      troop     beast

  5     drow sword maiden              normal     troop     humanoid

  5     ettin                          large      troop     giant

  5     flux elemental                 normal     troop     elemental

  5     gargoyle                       normal     troop     construct

  5     huge white dragon              huge       troop     dragon

  5     kobold dragon-soul             normal     troop     humanoid

  5     mausoleum dragon               large      troop     dragon

  5     smoke devil                    normal     troop     devil

  5     stalker                        large      troop     beast

  5     werebear                       large      troop     beast

  5     whitescale rime walker         normal     troop     humanoid

  5     air elemental                  normal     wrecker   elemental

  5     bulette                        large      wrecker   beast

  5     centaur raider                 normal     wrecker   humanoid

  5     ebon gauntlet adjudicator      large      wrecker   humanoid

  5     fire elemental                 normal     wrecker   elemental

  5     frenzy demon                   normal     wrecker   demon

  5     ghast                          normal     wrecker   undead

  5     gray raider                    normal     wrecker   undead

  5     great hound                    large      wrecker   beast

  5     green bulette                  large      wrecker   beast

  5     half-orc tribal champion       normal     wrecker   humanoid

  5     hydra, five-headed             huge       wrecker   beast

  5     kelpling                       2×         wrecker   plant

  5     koruku larva                   normal     wrecker   beast

  5     lumberland dirt-fisher         huge       wrecker   beast

  5     mutant bullfrog                large      wrecker   beast

  5     ogre champion                  large      wrecker   giant

  5     ravenous bumoorah              normal     wrecker   beast

  5     sahuagin                       normal     wrecker   humanoid

  5     tribal minotaur berserker      large      wrecker   humanoid

  5     warped beast                   normal     wrecker   aberration

  5     wendigo spirit                 large      wrecker   undead

  5     wyvern                         large      wrecker   beast

  6     centaur ranger                 normal     archer    humanoid

  6     manticore                      large      archer    beast

  6     bearded devil (barbazu)        large      blocker   devil

  6     coin collector zombie          normal     blocker   undead

  6     gelatinous octahedron          huge       blocker   ooze

  6     intellect assassin             normal     blocker   aberration

  6     lich flower                    2×         blocker   undead

  6     spell golem warder             normal     blocker   construct

  6     spriggan                       normal     blocker   humanoid

  6     death blossom                  2×         caster    undead

  6     drider                         large      caster    aberration

  6     drow spider-sorceress          normal     caster    humanoid

  6     ebon gauntlet eye              normal     caster    humanoid

  6     glittering bearer              normal     caster    undead

  6     jackal mage                    normal     caster    humanoid

  6     rakshasa sybarite              2×         caster    humanoid

  6     cackling demon                 normal     leader    demon

  6     centaur champion               2×         leader    humanoid

  6     hallowed gargoyle              normal     leader    construct

  6     sparkscale naga                large      leader    beast

  6     star-mask cult leader          2×         leader    aberration

  6     trog shaman                    normal     leader    humanoid

  6     bat demon                      normal     mook      demon

  6     death marker                   normal     mook      undead

  6     forge wolf                     large      mook      construct

  6     frogspawn thug                 2×         mook      humanoid

  6     giggling demon                 normal     mook      demon

  6     ice zombie                     normal     mook      undead

  6     jotun auroch                   huge       mook      beast

  6     lokkris                        normal     mook      beast

  6     major haunting                 normal     mook      undead

  6     apex zorigami                  normal     spoiler   construct

  6     atrocious gibbering mouther    large      spoiler   aberration

  6     chuul                          large      spoiler   aberration

  6     clay golem                     large      spoiler   construct

  6     coursing manticore             large      spoiler   beast

  6     crimsoncap                     normal     spoiler   humanoid

  6     faun enchanter                 normal     spoiler   humanoid

  6     hag                            normal     spoiler   humanoid

  6     medium silver dragon           normal     spoiler   dragon

  6     parasitic dybbuk               2×         spoiler   demon

  6     phantom                        normal     spoiler   undead

  6     poison dandelion               2×         spoiler   undead

  6     shadow mongoose subverter of   normal     spoiler   spirit
        fate                                                

  6     vampire spawn                  normal     spoiler   undead

  6     vrock (vulture demon)          normal     spoiler   demon

  6     waterhorse                     2×         spoiler   humanoid

  6     wild oread                     2×         spoiler   elemental

  6     blackscale shadow dancer       normal     troop     humanoid

  6     briar elf slayer               normal     troop     humanoid

  6     chuulish swarm                 normal     troop     aberration

  6     corpse dybbuk                  2×         troop     demon

  6     dire tiger                     large      troop     beast

  6     eidolon in hunting form        3×         troop     spirit

  6     fomorian bully                 large      troop     giant

  6     frogspawn champion             normal     troop     humanoid

  6     frost-würm                     large      troop     beast

  6     hellcat                        large      troop     devil

  6     hill giant                     large      troop     giant

  6     pixie knight                   normal     troop     humanoid

  6     spider mount                   normal     troop     beast

  6     star-mask cult puppet          normal     troop     aberration

  6     winter beast                   large      troop     beast

  6     weretiger                      large      troop     beast

  6     blizzard dragon                large      wrecker   dragon

  6     blood rose                     2×         wrecker   undead

  6     cambion katar                  normal     wrecker   demon

  6     disgraced legionnaire          2×         wrecker   undead

  6     hellwarped spawn               large      wrecker   aberration

  6     horned azinth adult            large      wrecker   beast

  6     large black dragon             large      wrecker   dragon

  6     large bronze dragon            large      wrecker   dragon

  6     medium red dragon              normal     wrecker   dragon

  6     medusa outlaw                  2×         wrecker   humanoid

  6     ogre mage knight               large      wrecker   giant

  6     sahuagin mutant                large      wrecker   humanoid

  6     specter                        2×         wrecker   undead

  6     taranar avalanche              huge       wrecker   elemental

  7     bonded arcane archer           3×         archer    construct

  7     faun ranger                    normal     archer    humanoid

  7     drow darkbolt                  normal     archer    humanoid

  7     gnoll fiendfletch              normal     archer    humanoid

  7     big earth elemental            normal     blocker   elemental

  7     big water elemental            normal     blocker   elemental

  7     bronze errant                  3×         blocker   construct

  7     bronze golem                   large      blocker   construct

  7     gelatinous dodecahedron        huge       blocker   ooze

  7     gnoll shredder                 normal     blocker   humanoid

  7     tempter                        2×         blocker   undead

  7     cloud giant warrior            huge       caster    giant

  7     fire giant smith               large      caster    giant

  7     ice sorceress                  large      caster    giant

  7     medium gold dragon             normal     caster    dragon

  7     ogre mage                      large      caster    giant

  7     rakshasa, devourer of wizards  2×         caster    humanoid

  7     void dragon                    huge       caster    dragon

  7     ebon gauntlet inquisitor       2×         leader    humanoid

  7     frogspawn old-one              elite      leader    humanoid

  7     manafang naga                  large      leader    beast

  7     trog chieftain                 normal     leader    humanoid

  7     barbed vines                   normal     mook      plant

  7     death shade                    normal     mook      undead

  7     orc rager                      normal     mook      humanoid

  7     summoned ghoul                 normal     mook      undead

  7     bergship raider                large      spoiler   giant

  7     fang devil                     huge       spoiler   devil

  7     frost giant                    large      spoiler   giant

  7     koruku symbiont                normal     spoiler   humanoid

  7     large green dragon             large      spoiler   dragon

  7     melusine                       2×         spoiler   humanoid

  7     phase spider                   large      spoiler   beast

  7     reaver                         2×         spoiler   undead

  7     river-spirit                   2×         spoiler   humanoid

  7     twisted soul                   2×         spoiler   undead

  7     star-mask brainbuster          normal     spoiler   aberration

  7     umluppuk                       huge       spoiler   aberration

  7     wild nereid                    2×         spoiler   elemental

  7     big flux elemental             normal     troop     elemental

  7     bonded hexknight               3×         troop     construct

  7     faun outlaw                    normal     troop     humanoid

  7     fire giant holy warrior        large      troop     giant

  7     greater ebon gauntlet sword    normal     troop     humanoid

  7     hezrou (toad demon)            large      troop     demon

  7     hooded devil                   normal     troop     devil

  7     kohwa enforcer                 large      troop     beast

  7     lammasu warrior                large      troop     beast

  7     moon dragon                    huge       troop     dragon

  7     screaming hoardling            normal     troop     undead

  7     big air elemental              normal     wrecker   elemental

  7     big fire elemental             normal     wrecker   elemental

  7     cloud giant thane              huge       wrecker   giant

  7     crustycap                      normal     wrecker   humanoid

  7     ethereal dybbuk                2×         wrecker   demon

  7     fallen lammasu                 large      wrecker   beast

  7     fomorian top-cannibal          large      wrecker   giant

  7     hellstone gargoyle             normal     wrecker   construct

  7     hydra, seven-headed            huge       wrecker   beast

  7     jackal priest                  elite      wrecker   humanoid

  7     redscale fiery vanquisher      normal     wrecker   humanoid

  7     star-mask brute                large      wrecker   aberration

  7     temple lion                    large      wrecker   construct

  7     tyrant lizard                  large      wrecker   beast

  7     volcano dragon                 large      wrecker   dragon

  7     wandering hubris devil         huge       wrecker   devil

  8     briar elf stalker              normal     archer    humanoid

  8     giant praying mantis           large      blocker   beast

  8     stone golem                    large      blocker   construct

  8     sunder wraith                  normal     blocker   undead

  8     black skull                    normal     caster    undead

  8     bonded warlock                 3×         caster    construct

  8     glabrezou (pincer demon)       large      caster    demon

  8     golden eye necromancer         3×         caster    undead or humanoid

  8     large blue dragon              large      caster    dragon

  8     ogre lightning mage            large      caster    giant

  8     rakshasa                       2×         caster    humanoid

  8     rakshasa delver                2×         caster    humanoid

  8     shadow dragon                  large      caster    dragon

  8     the purple dragon (champion)   huge       caster    dragon

  8     bonded prophet                 3×         leader    construct

  8     elder swaysong naga            normal     leader    beast

  8     fire giant priest-general      elite      leader    giant
                                       large                

  8     half-orc commander             normal     leader    humanoid

  8     koruku landkiller              huge       leader    beast

  8     whitescale blighter            normal     leader    humanoid

  8     koruku servitor                normal     mook      spirit

  8     parasitic lightning beetle     normal     mook      beast

  8     purple larva                   normal     mook      beast

  8     shadow thief                   normal     mook      dragon

  8     trog underling                 normal     mook      humanoid

  8     couatl                         large      spoiler   beast

  8     frost giant adventurer         large      spoiler   giant

  8     lammasu wizard                 large      spoiler   beast

  8     lich count                     2×         spoiler   undead

  8     nix                            normal     spoiler   humanoid

  8     shadow mongoose thief of fate  normal     spoiler   spirit

  8     taranar warrior                large      spoiler   elemental

  8     void phoenix                   large      spoiler   elemental

  8     great xorn                     elite      troop     elemental

  8     horned salamander              huge       troop     elemental

  8     laughing demon                 normal     troop     demon

  8     stone giant                    large      troop     giant

  8     adult remorhaz                 large      wrecker   beast

  8     cambion hellblade              normal     wrecker   demon

  8     chaos hydra                    huge       wrecker   beast

  8     death knight                   2×         wrecker   undead

  8     fire giant                     large      wrecker   giant

  8     fury devil (erinyes)           normal     wrecker   devil

  8     iconic chimera                 large      wrecker   beast

  8     mummy                          2×         wrecker   humanoid

  8     purple worm                    huge       wrecker   beast

  8     taranar great stone            huge       wrecker   elemental

  9     epic earth elemental           normal     blocker   elemental

  9     epic water elemental           normal     blocker   elemental

  9     despoiler mage                 normal     caster    demon

  9     jackal high mage               normal     caster    humanoid

  9     lammasu priest                 large      caster    beast

  9     prismatic ogre mage            large      caster    giant

  9     rakshasa mastermind            2×         caster    humanoid

  9     briar tree                     normal     leader    plant

  9     elder sparkscale naga          normal     leader    beast

  9     fire giant warlord             large      leader    giant

  9     epic haunting                  normal     mook      undead

  9     giant zombie                   large      mook      undead

  9     hoard spirit                   normal     mook      construct

  9     hooked demon                   normal     mook      demon

  9     ogre minion                    large      mook      giant

  9     the flensed                    normal     mook      aberration

  9     wraith bat                     normal     mook      undead

  9     djinn                          large      spoiler   giant

  9     elder wendigo                  huge       spoiler   demon

  9     empyrean dragon                huge       spoiler   dragon

  9     giant vrock (vulture demon)    large      spoiler   demon

  9     greenscale spineback           normal     spoiler   humanoid

  9     hoardsong dragon               large      spoiler   dragon

  9     large copper dragon            large      spoiler   dragon

  9     soul flenser                   normal     spoiler   aberration

  9     spell golem mage hunter        large      spoiler   construct

  9     bone devil (osyluth)           large      troop     devil

  9     briar elf warrior              normal     troop     humanoid

  9     eidolon in guardian form       3×         troop     spirit

  9     greater flux elemental         normal     troop     elemental

  9     headless zombie                normal     troop     undead

  9     marble golem                   large      troop     construct

  9     black pudding                  huge       wrecker   ooze

  9     chimera                        large      wrecker   beast

  9     deep bulette                   huge       wrecker   beast

  9     dread specter                  3×         wrecker   undead

  9     drow cavalry                   2×         wrecker   humanoid

  9     epic air elemental             normal     wrecker   elemental

  9     epic fire elemental            normal     wrecker   elemental

  9     great hubris devil             huge       wrecker   devil

  9     huge black dragon              huge       wrecker   dragon

  9     huge bronze dragon             huge       wrecker   dragon

  9     skull of the beast             large      wrecker   undead

  10    blackscale light-killer        normal     archer    humanoid

  10    storm giant                    huge       archer    giant

  10    bronze kingsguard              normal     blocker   construct

  10    most hungry ghost              normal     blocker   undead

  10    barbed devil (hamatula)        normal     caster    devil

  10    briar elf sorcerer             normal     caster    humanoid

  10    grandmother                    3×         caster    humanoid

  10    nalfeshnee (boar demon)        large      caster    demon

  10    rakshasa saint                 2×         caster    humanoid

  10    royal bearer                   normal     caster    undead

  10    elder manafang naga            normal     leader    beast

  10    jackal high priest             2×         leader    humanoid

  10    frenzied wolf pack             normal     mook      beast

  10    great fang cadre               normal     mook      humanoid

  10    greater summoned ghoul         normal     mook      undead

  10    gruesome death shade           normal     mook      undead

  10    loyal gatherer                 normal     mook      undead

  10    opportunistic orc band         normal     mook      humanoid

  10    spawn of the master            normal     mook      undead

  10    star-mask floating brain       normal     mook      aberration

  10    fomori tyrant                  normal     spoiler   aberration

  10    gruesome reaver                2×         spoiler   undead

  10    large silver dragon            large      spoiler   dragon

  10    treant titan                   large      spoiler   plant

  10    vampire                        normal     spoiler   undead

  10    dusk zorigami                  normal     wrecker   construct

  10    efreet                         large      wrecker   giant

  10    hellwarped brute               huge       wrecker   aberration

  10    iron golem                     large      wrecker   construct

  10    large red dragon               large      wrecker   dragon

  10    massive mutant chuul           huge       wrecker   aberration

  10    river devil                    normal     wrecker   devil

  11    briar elf assassin             normal     archer    humanoid

  11    great sunder wraith            normal     blocker   undead

  11    bluescale orb-bearer           normal     caster    humanoid

  11    large gold dragon              large      caster    dragon

  11    medusa noble                   2×         caster    humanoid

  11    rakshasa magician              normal     caster    humanoid

  11    ice devil (gelugon)            normal     leader    devil

  11    fanatical druid circle         normal     mook      humanoid

  11    militant ranger squad          normal     mook      humanoid

  11    barrier beast                  huge       spoiler   beast

  11    elder couatl                   large      spoiler   beast

  11    huge copper dragon             huge       spoiler   dragon

  11    huge green dragon              huge       spoiler   dragon

  11    epic flux elemental            normal     troop     elemental

  11    greathoard elder               huge       wrecker   dragon

  11    remorhaz queen                 large      wrecker   beast

  12    star-mask brain zealot         normal     archer    aberration

  12    huge blue dragon               huge       caster    dragon

  12    solar phoenix                  large      caster    elemental

  12    star-mask omnipotent brain     huge       caster    aberration

  12    the purple dragon (epic)       huge       caster    dragon

  12    briar elf sovereign            2×         leader    humanoid

  12    smoke minions                  normal     mook      construct

  12    treant avenger                 normal     mook      plant

  12    flamewreathed dragon           huge       spoiler   dragon

  12    fomori torturer                normal     spoiler   aberration

  12    lich prince                    2×         spoiler   undead

  12    horned devil (cornugon)        large      troop     devil

  12    marilith (serpent demon)       large      troop     demon

  12    pyroclastic salamander         huge       troop     elemental

  12    ancient purple worm            huge       wrecker   beast

  12    colossal hubris devil          huge       wrecker   devil

  12    fallen icon's maw              huge       wrecker   undead

  12    redscale flamewing             normal     wrecker   humanoid

  13    the final devil                huge       leader    devil

  13    river devil minion             normal     mook      devil

  13    fallen icon -- underground     3×         spoiler   aberration

  13    huge silver dragon             huge       spoiler   dragon

  13    fallen icon's shadow           large      troop     undead

  13    balor (flame demon)            large      wrecker   demon

  13    hagunemnon                     large      wrecker   aberration

  13    huge red dragon                huge       wrecker   dragon

  14    huge gold dragon               large      caster    dragon

  14    fallen icon -- nature          huge       spoiler   beast

  14    pit fiend                      huge       wrecker   devil

  14    star-brain dungeon heart       huge       wrecker   aberration

  15    tarrasque                      huge       wrecker   beast
  ----------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Monster Key

+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Size      | Initiative                                       | * | x |
| /Strength |                                                  | * | x |
|           | **Attack**                                       | A |   |
| Level     |                                                  | C | x |
|           | *Extra Effects*                                  | * | x |
| Role      |                                                  | * |   |
|           | *Specials*                                       |   | x |
| Type      |                                                  | * | x |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | P | x |
|           |                                                  | D | x |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | M |   |
|           |                                                  | D |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | H |   |
|           |                                                  | P |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                  |   |   |
+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Size/Strength and Level

These are the key stats that determine how tough a battle will be using
the creature. Sizes are regular, large, and huge. Regular-sized monster
can have double-strength (2x) and triple-strength (3x). Regular-sized
and regular-strength monsters are labeled as normal.

### Role

Monsters with different roles still use the same stats.

#### Archers

Archers are ranged attackers who use weapons rather than spells.

#### Blockers

Blockers have abilities that help them protect their allies.

#### Casters

Casters are magician-types who need space to cast their spells properly.
They're capable of anything.

#### Leaders

Leaders have abilities that help other monster allies fight better.

#### Mooks

Mooks are minor monsters that are good cannon fodder. (See Mooks.)

#### Spoilers

Spoilers mess the PCs up with attacks that inflict harmful effects
instead of or in addition to hit point damage.

#### Troops

Troops are the default monster type that aim to hurt PCs via hit point
damage.

#### Wreckers

Wreckers really bring the pain. Enemy groups containing only wreckers
will be very dangerous to the PCs.

### Type

Some spells and magic items care about monster type. A ranger with a
favored enemy type definitely cares about it.

Types include aberration, beast, construct, demon, dragon, giant,
humanoid, ooze, and undead.

### Initiative, AC, PD, MD, HP

See Combat Stats.

### Attack

The default attack is a melee attack against one target that requires a
standard action to use. If an attack can target more than one creature,
that information follows the attack value.

When a monster makes an opportunity attack, it must use a melee attack.
If that attack action normally includes multiple attacks, it can make
only one attack roll.

The abbreviation **R:** indicates that an attack is a ranged attack
instead of a melee attack. The default ranged attack assumes a single
nearby target, but some can hit faraway targets as well, which is noted
in the targeting information or extra effect trigger.

The abbreviation **C:** refers to close-quarters attacks that can be
used without triggering opportunity attacks from engaged enemies like
ranged attacks do. Each close-quarters attack will note its targets.

Some attacks can only be used when the natural roll triggers it. These
attacks have a *\[Special trigger\]* indicator at the start of the
attack line. Other triggers allow a monster to use a normal standard
action attack as a free action.

### Extra Effect Trigger

Many monster abilities trigger randomly based on the monster's attack
roll. Not all attacks have triggers. Most extra effect triggers are
natural even or odd attack rolls or other specific die rolls, but a few
are more unusual.

### Specials

These are other attacks and special abilities like *fear* or movement
abilities like *flight*. Not all monsters have them.

Some monsters have nastier special abilities that increase a monster's
options and help keep monsters interesting throughout the campaign. Use
them as options whenever you like.

## Monster Reference

### Animal/Critter

For dire animal abilities, see Dire Animals.

All bats have the following abilities:

-   *Echolocation:* Bats rely on sound waves to sense their
    surroundings. A bat can "see" in total darkness, and can detect
    creatures using invisibility or visual illusions to hide.

-   *Flight:* Small bats fly quickly and turn easily. Bigger bats fly
    more awkwardly.

-   *Wall-crawler:* A bat can climb on ceilings and walls as easily as
    it moves on the ground.

#### Giant Ant

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +0                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Mandibles +5 vs. AC---**3 damage                | A | 1 |
| **0       |                                                   | C | 4 |
| level**   | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 1d3 ongoing  | * | * |
|           | acid damage.                                      | * | * |
| **Troop** |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A giant ant can climb on ceilings | * | * |
| **Beast** | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.    | * | * |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | H | 0 |
|           |                                                   | P | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Rat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +2                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Infected bite +5 vs. AC**---4 ongoing damage    | A | 1 |
| **1st   |                                                   | C | 5 |
| level**   | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **Mook**  | *Squealing pack attack:* This creature gains a +1 |   |   |
|           | attack bonus per other dire rat engaged with the  | * | * |
| **Beast** | target it's attacking.                            | * | * |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 6 |
|           |                                                   | P | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Scorpion

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +6                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Pincer +6 vs. PD---**1 damage, and the scorpion | A | 1 |
| **1st   | gains a +2 attack bonus against the same target   | C | 6 |
| level**   | this turn with its *stinger* attack.              | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **        | *Limited use:* 2/round, each requiring a quick    |   |   |
| Wrecker** | action. (Hitting the same target twice with       | * | * |
|           | *pincer* gives the *stinger* attack a +4 bonus.)  | * | * |
| **Beast** |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | **Stinger +6 vs. AC---**3 damage, and 3 ongoing   | D | 5 |
|           | poison damage                                     | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 2 |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Swarm of Bats

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Swarming bites +7 vs. PD (1d3 nearby         | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   | enemies)**---2 damage, and after the attack, the  | * |   |
|           | swarm of bats engages one of the targets          |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered until  | * |   |
|           | the end of its next turn. It can end the effect   | P | 3 |
|           | by attacking the swarm, or if the swarm drops to  | D | 0 |
|           | 0 hp.                                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *No opportunities:* The swarm of bats can't make  |   |   |
|           | opportunity attacks, and enemies can't make       | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks against it.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Swarming resistance:* Each turn, the swarm of    | D |   |
|           | bats gains *resist damage 18+* to all damage from | * |   |
|           | attacks by enemies that the swarm did NOT attack  | * |   |
|           | that turn.                                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wolf

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +4                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Bite +5 vs. AC**---5 damage                     | A | 1 |
| **1st   |                                                   | C | 7 |
| level**   | *Pack attack:* This creature gains a +2 bonus to  | * | * |
|           | attack and damage for each other ally engaged     | * | * |
| **Troop** | with the target (max +4 bonus).                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **Beast** |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 2 |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bat Cavalry

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Fangs, wings, and sword +8 vs. AC**---Damage    | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | and effect depends on the natural roll            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast &   | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 10 damage    | * | 4 |
| Humanoid  | from a sword strike, and the bat cavalry pops     | * |   |
|           | free from the target and can move as a free       | P | 7 |
|           | action.                                           | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss against a target taking        | * |   |
|           | ongoing damage:* The target takes 6 damage from   |   |   |
|           | clawing wings.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes 8 damage, and | M |   |
|           | 5 ongoing damage from bat fangs.                  | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 2--5:* In addition to any other effect,  | * |   |
|           | the bat cavalry pops free from the target, and as |   |   |
|           | a free action, it can move to another nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemy and make a *fangs, wings, and sword* attack | * |   |
|           | against it.                                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | **R: Thrown javelin +5 vs. AC**---8 damage        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist ranged damage 16+:* When a ranged attack  |   |   |
|           | targets this creature while it's flying, the      |   |   |
|           | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack    |   |   |
|           | roll or it only deals half damage.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Skittish:* A bat cavalry engaged with a          |   |   |
|           | conscious enemy after attacking it will attempt   |   |   |
|           | to disengage and fly into the air if it has a     |   |   |
|           | move action remaining that turn.                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Blood drinker:* When the bat cavalry drops an    |   |   |
|           | enemy to 0 hp or below, it continues to attack    |   |   |
|           | that enemy (until it dies) instead of attacking   |   |   |
|           | other enemies.                                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bear

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +4                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Bite +7 vs. AC**---6 damage                     | A | 1 |
| **2nd   |                                                   | C | 7 |
| level**   | *Natural even hit:* The target takes +1d6 damage  | * | * |
|           | from a claw swipe.                                | * | * |
| **Troop** |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **Beast** |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 4 |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Bat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Fangs and wings +6 vs. AC**---5 damage, and 5   | * | 7 |
| Troop     | ongoing damage                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural 2--5:* The dire bat pops free from the   | * | 4 |
|           | target and can move as a free action.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Resist ranged damage 16+:* When a ranged attack  | D | 2 |
|           | targets this creature while it's flying, the      | * |   |
|           | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack    | * |   |
|           | roll or it only deals half damage.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Skittish:* A dire bat engaged with a conscious   | * |   |
|           | enemy after attacking it will attempt to          | M |   |
|           | disengage and fly into the air if it has a move   | D |   |
|           | action remaining that turn.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Blood drinker:* When the dire bat drops an enemy | * |   |
|           | to 0 hp or below, it continues to attack that     | H |   |
|           | enemy (until it dies) instead of attacking other  | P |   |
|           | enemies.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Dire feature:* This bat is a dire animal and has |   |   |
|           | a dire feature.                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Web Spider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| **Large** | Initiative: +4                                    | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **2nd   | **Bite +7 vs. AC---**5 damage, and 5 ongoing      | A | 1 |
| level**   | poison damage                                     | C | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **        | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 2d6     | * | * |
| Blocker** | ongoing poison damage if it's dazed or stuck.     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **Beast** | **C: Web +7 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby enemies in a   | * | * |
|           | group**)**---**3 damage, and the target is dazed  | P | 1 |
|           | until the end of the spider's next turn           | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is also stuck until the | * | * |
|           | end of the spider's next turn.                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A giant web spider can climb on   | * | * |
|           | ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the   | M | 1 |
|           | ground.                                           | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 6 |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hunting Spider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *         | Initiative: +6                                    | * | * |
| *Normal** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | **Bite +6 vs. AC---**8 damage                     | A | 1 |
| **2nd   |                                                   | C | 7 |
| level**   | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 1d8 ongoing  | * | * |
|           | poison damage.                                    | * | * |
| **        |                                                   |   |   |
| Wrecker** | *Scuttle:* A hunting spider can turn its own      | * | * |
|           | failed disengage check into a success by taking   | * | * |
| **Beast** | 1d4 damage.                                       | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A hunting spider can climb on     | * | * |
|           | ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the   | * | * |
|           | ground.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | M | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 3 |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Wolf

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| **Large** | Initiative: +6                                    | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
| **3rd   | **Vicious bite +8 vs. AC**---18 damage            | A | 1 |
| level**   |                                                   | C | 8 |
|           | *Pack attack:* This creature gains a +2 bonus to  | * | * |
| **Troop** | attack and damage for each other ally engaged     | * | * |
|           | with the target (max +4 bonus).                   |   |   |
| **Beast** |                                                   | * | * |
|           | *Chilling howl:* Whenever a dire wolf's attack    | * | * |
|           | drops an enemy to 0 hp or below, all dire wolves  | P | 1 |
|           | in the battle can howl as a free action. When the | D | 7 |
|           | wolves howl, each enemy in the battle takes a     | * | * |
|           | penalty to its attacks and all defenses equal to  | * | * |
|           | the number of living dire wolves in the battle    |   |   |
|           | (max --5) until the end of the attacking wolf's   | * | * |
|           | next turn. New howls extend the duration of the   | * | * |
|           | current howl rather than downgrading the howl's   | M | 1 |
|           | effect if dire wolves have been slain in the      | D | 3 |
|           | meantime.                                         | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           | *One dire feature:* Roll randomly unless you know |   |   |
|           | this beast's story already.                       | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | H | 8 |
|           |                                                   | P | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
|           |                                                   | * | * |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Goblin Bat Mage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Bloody fangs +7 vs. AC**---6 damage, and 6      | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   | ongoing damage                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast &   | *Natural 2--5:* The goblin bat mage pops free     | * | 6 |
| Humanoid  | from the target and can move as a free action.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | **R: Blood bolt spell +7 vs. PD**---8 negative    | D | 4 |
|           | energy damage                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* If target is staggered after  |   |   |
|           | taking the damage, it's also hampered until the   | * |   |
|           | end of its next turn.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* One random nearby ally of the  | D |   |
|           | target takes 2d6 negative energy damage.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist ranged damage 16+:* When a ranged attack  |   |   |
|           | targets this creature while it's flying, the      | * |   |
|           | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack    | * |   |
|           | roll or it only deals half damage.                | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Skittish:* A goblin bat mage engaged with a      | * |   |
|           | conscious enemy after attacking it will attempt   | * |   |
|           | to disengage and fly into the air if it has a     |   |   |
|           | move action remaining that turn.                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Unwieldy flyer:* When the goblin bat mage is     |   |   |
|           | staggered, it must roll an immediate save. On a   |   |   |
|           | failure, it loses its ability to fly until the    |   |   |
|           | end of its next turn. If flying near the ground,  |   |   |
|           | it lands immediately. If flying faraway from the  |   |   |
|           | ground, it lands badly and takes 15 damage.       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Bear

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| *        | Initiative: +7                                   | * | * |
| *Large** |                                                  | * | * |
|          | **Bite +8 vs. AC**---24 damage                   | A | 1 |
| **4th  |                                                  | C | 9 |
| level**  | *Natural even hit:* The target takes +2d6 damage | * | * |
|          | from a claw swipe.                               | * | * |
| *        |                                                  |   |   |
| *Troop** | *Savage:* The dire bear gains a +2 attack bonus  | * | * |
|          | against staggered enemies.                       | * | * |
| *        |                                                  | P | 1 |
| *Beast** | *One dire feature:* Roll randomly unless you     | D | 9 |
|          | know this beast's story already.                 | * | * |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  | M | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  | H | 1 |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | * |
|          |                                                  |   | * |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Boar

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 5th    | **Battle-hardened tusks +13 vs. AC**---22 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The dire boar can make a *bash*   | * | 6 |
| Troop    | attack against a different target as a free      | * |   |
|          | action.                                          |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bash +10 vs. PD**---The  | * |   |
|          | target is weakened (*--4 to attacks and          | P | 1 |
|          | defenses*) until the end of the boar's next turn | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Bestial durability:* When an enemy's attack has | * |   |
|          | an effect on the dire boar other than damage,    |   |   |
|          | the boar can roll an immediate hard save (16+);  | * |   |
|          | on a success, it negates that effect.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Last stand:* The boar doesn't die until it      | D |   |
|          | reaches --60 hp. While at 0 hp or below but more | * |   |
|          | than --60 hp, it must roll a normal save at the  | * |   |
|          | end of each of its turns; on a failure it dies.  |   |   |
|          | (Fighting dire boars always presents a choice    | * |   |
|          | for the PCs: pile on damage to drop it to --60   | * |   |
|          | hp, or trust the save roll to go their way.)     | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *One random dire feature:* Use the dire features | * |   |
|          | table.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Furious streak:* When the dire boar can make a  |   |   |
|          | *bash* attack, if it isn't engaged with a        |   |   |
|          | different enemy, as a free action it can pop     |   |   |
|          | free of the enemy engaged with it and move to a  |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy to make that *bash* attack.         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Thunder Bat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 5th     | **Fangs +10 vs. AC**---15 damage                  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit against a dazed enemy:* The     | * | 8 |
| Archer    | target takes 20 ongoing thunder damage.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | **C: Thunder screech +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby       | * | 5 |
|           | creatures in a group)**---12 thunder damage       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is dazed (save     | D | 0 |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist ranged damage 16+:* When a ranged attack  |   |   |
|           | targets this creature while it's flying, the      | * |   |
|           | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack    | * |   |
|           | roll or it only deals half damage.                | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Resist thunder 18+:* When a thunder attack       | * |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   | * |   |
|           | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals   |   |   |
|           | half damage.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Unwieldy flyer:* When the thunder bat is         | H |   |
|           | staggered, it must roll an immediate save. On a   | P |   |
|           | failure, it loses its ability to fly until the    | * |   |
|           | end of its next turn. If flying near the ground,  | * |   |
|           | it lands immediately. If flying faraway from the  |   |   |
|           | ground, it lands badly and takes 25 damage.       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dire Tiger

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Crushing jaws and shredding claws +11 vs. AC   | A |   |
| level    | (2 attacks)**---17 damage                        | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Troop    | *\[Special trigger\]* **Pounce +13 vs. AC**---38 | * |   |
|          | damage, and the target is hampered while it's    |   | 1 |
| Beast    | engaged with the tiger                           | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Pouncing opportunity:* When an enemy moves to   | P | 1 |
|          | engage the dire tiger while it's unengaged, it   | D | 6 |
|          | can meet that enemy halfway and make a *pounce*  | * | 0 |
|          | attack as an interrupt action before the         | * |   |
|          | target's attack.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Springing attack:* If the dire tiger is         | * |   |
|          | unengaged and moves to engage an enemy (with a   | M |   |
|          | springing leap), it can make a *pounce* attack   | D |   |
|          | as a standard action.                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *One random dire feature:* Use the dire features |   |   |
|          | table.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Praying Mantis

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Jagged claws +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---30     | A |   |
| level    | damage, and if the target's initiative bonus is  | C | 2 |
|          | +10 or less, the target is grabbed until it      | * | 1 |
| Blocker  | disengages or until the mantis makes a *jagged   | * |   |
|          | claws* attack against a different target         |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 7 |
|          | *Close fighting:* When an enemy fails a          | * |   |
|          | disengage check against the dire mantis, the     | P | 3 |
|          | mantis can make an opportunity attack against    | D | 2 |
|          | it.                                              | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Big but brittle:* While the dire mantis might   |   |   |
|          | rate as a huge monster in terms of size, its     | * |   |
|          | stats are based on those for a large monster.    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *One random dire feature:* Use the dire features | D |   |
|          | table.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Clacking mandibles:* When the dire mantis       | * |   |
|          | starts its turn grabbing an enemy, it can make a | H |   |
|          | *chomp* attack against that enemy as a free      | P |   |
|          | action.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Chomp +15 vs. AC**---40 damage                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wraith Bat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 9th     | **Ghostly fangs +14 vs. PD**---25 negative energy | A |   |
| level     | damage, and the target takes +1d8 negative energy | C | 2 |
|           | damage for each relationship point it has with    | * | 3 |
| Mook      | the bat's associated icon.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Undead    | **C: Spiraling assault +14 vs. PD (1d3 nearby     | * | 0 |
|           | enemies)**---22 negative energy damage, and after | * |   |
|           | the attack the wraith bat teleports to and        | P | 3 |
|           | engages with one target it hit.                   | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Regardless of the number of wraith | * |   |
|           | bats in the battle, only one wraith bat can use   |   |   |
|           | this attack each round.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has resist damage 16+ to | M |   |
|           | all damage except force damage, which damages it  | D |   |
|           | normally. A wraith bat can move through solid     | * |   |
|           | objects but it can't end its movement inside      | * |   |
|           | them.                                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ankheg

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 2nd     | **Mandibles +7 vs. AC**---8 damage                | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* If the target is small, the   | * | 7 |
| Troop     | ankheg grabs it. While the ankheg is grabbing a   | * |   |
|           | creature, the only legal target for its           |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *mandibles* attack is the grabbed creature.       | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Acid spit +7 vs. PD (one nearby enemy, plus  | P | 6 |
|           | any enemy the ankheg has grabbed)**---5 ongoing   | D | 0 |
|           | acid damage                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Escape speed:* At the end of the ankheg's turn,  | * |   |
|           | roll a d6. If it's equal to or less than the      | M |   |
|           | escalation die, the ankheg can move again as a    | D |   |
|           | free action.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Azer

#### Fire Bat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Burning claws +8 vs. AC**---2 damage, and 2     | A |   |
| level     | fire damage                                       | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Mook      | *Fiery flier:* An unengaged fire bat can move,    | * |   |
|           | make a *burning contrail* attack, and move away   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | from the target as a standard action without      | * | 1 |
|           | taking an opportunity attack from the target.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | **Burning contrail +7 vs. PD**---5 fire damage    | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Blistering heat:* When an enemy engaged with the | * |   |
|           | fire bat attacks it, that enemy takes 2 fire      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fire resistance 16+:* When a fire attack targets | M |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | D |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Fire bats are agile fliers, especially  | * |   |
|           | when riding hot air currents. They slow down a    | * |   |
|           | bit away from warmth.                             | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Magma Brute

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: cold                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Blazing-hot iron fists +8 vs. AC (2             | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | attacks)**---6 damage                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Construct | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 6 extra fire      | * | 2 |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | **C: Molten spray +7 vs. PD (1d2 + 1 enemies      | D | 6 |
|           | engaged with the brute)**---8 fire damage, and    | * |   |
|           | the brute loses 12 hit points.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, only while the brute is  | * |   |
|           | staggered.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Blistering heat:* When an enemy engaged with the | D |   |
|           | brute attacks it, that enemy takes 2 fire damage. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fire resistance 18+:* When a fire attack targets |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Azer Soldier

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Red-hot hammer +9 vs. AC**---8 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* 4 ongoing fire        | * | 7 |
| Troop     | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dwarf     | **R: Throwing axe +9 vs. AC**---7 damage          | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Blistering heat:* When an enemy engaged with the | P | 5 |
|           | azer attacks it, that enemy takes 2 fire damage.  | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fighting surge:* Once per battle when an attack  | * |   |
|           | crits the azer but doesn't kill it, the azer can  |   |   |
|           | heal 4d6 hp.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Cold haters:* The azer adds the escalation die   | M |   |
|           | to its attacks against a target that is capable   | D |   |
|           | of dealing cold damage with a spell, attack, or   | * |   |
|           | magic item.                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fire resistance 18+:* When a fire attack targets | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | H |   |
|           | damage.                                           | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Basilisk

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 4th     | **Multi-legged attack +8 vs. AC (3 attacks, each  | A |   |
| Level     | against a different enemy)**---12 damage          | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| Wrecker   | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 5 ongoing poison  | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | *Basilisk's stare:* When a basilisk hits an enemy | * |   |
|           | that is already taking ongoing poison damage, the | P | 8 |
|           | basilisk can make a *basilisk's stare* attack     | D | 5 |
|           | against the target as a free action.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Basilisk's stare +8    |   |   |
|           | vs. MD**---5 ongoing poison damage, and the       | * |   |
|           | target must start making last gasp saves          | * |   |
|           | depending on the basilisk's type (see below) as   | M |   |
|           | it accidentally takes a full look at the          | D |   |
|           | basilisk. Constructs and undead are immune to     | * |   |
|           | this effect.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Last Gasp Failed Save Effects]{.underline}       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Green Basilisk**                                | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Failed save:* The target takes 25 poison damage  | * |   |
|           | as its blood turns to poison.                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fourth failed save:* The target's body liquefies |   |   |
|           | and they die.                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Red Basilisk**                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Failed save:* The target takes 15 fire damage,   |   |   |
|           | and each of the target's nearby allies takes 5    |   |   |
|           | fire damage as the target's blood boils under     |   |   |
|           | their skin and sprays outward in gouts of liquid  |   |   |
|           | fire.                                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fourth failed save:* The target's body ignites   |   |   |
|           | as their flaming skull shoots upward on a jet of  |   |   |
|           | burning blood, killing them.                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Black Basilisk**                                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Failed save:* The target's blood begins to       |   |   |
|           | coagulate and harden, and dust puffs out of their |   |   |
|           | lungs through their mouth.                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fourth failed save:* The target's body turns to  |   |   |
|           | stone and they die.                               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **White Basilisk**                                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Failed save:* The target begins to evaporate.    |   |   |
|           | The target must make an immediate normal save     |   |   |
|           | (11+) or it loses a chunk of flesh or a limb,     |   |   |
|           | whatever is dramatic but will allow the creature  |   |   |
|           | to survive (perhaps with minuses until healed).   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fourth failed save:* The target's body explodes  |   |   |
|           | into a fine red mist and they die.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist melee damage 18+:* When a melee attack    |   |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   |   |   |
|           | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals   |   |   |
|           | half damage. An attacker can ignore this          |   |   |
|           | resistance by declaring they are looking directly |   |   |
|           | at the basilisk during the attack. If they do,    |   |   |
|           | the basilisk can make a *basilisk's stare* attack |   |   |
|           | against them as a free action before the attack.  |   |   |
|           | Constructs and undead are not affected by this    |   |   |
|           | resistance.                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Stare-down:* When an enemy makes a ranged attack |   |   |
|           | against the basilisk, the basilisk can make a     |   |   |
|           | *basilisk's stare* attack against them as a free  |   |   |
|           | action before the attack.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Death breath:* Each creature engaged with the    |   |   |
|           | basilisk at the end of the basilisk's turn takes  |   |   |
|           | 10 poison damage.                                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Battle Shade

Treat the battlefield effects that follow as a big nastier special.

[Against The Pcs]{.underline}

Until all battle shades have been reduced to 0 hit points, select one of
the following effects at the start of each round.

-   Half-formed hands of mud and dirt reach out of the ground, grasping
    at the legs and feet. Make the following attack against 1d3
    non-flying creatures.

    -   **+7 vs PD**---The target is stuck until the start of their next
        > turn.

-   A literal fog of war (smoke, fog, blowing dust, etc.) covers the
    area. Ranged attacks from non-battle shade creatures have a --4
    penalty.

-   Broken and shattered weapons erupt out of the ground. Choose up to
    three characters in a group. Those players must roll a normal (11+)
    saving throw or take 2d10 damage.

-   Wild necromantic energy bursts like a geyser from the earth with a
    scream of pain and fear from dozens of spectral throats. Target 1d3
    characters with the following attack.

    -   **+6 vs MD**---4 damage and the target is dazed until the end of
        > their next turn.

-   Blood begets blood. As the characters are beaten and injured, the
    accumulated pain and blood revitalizes the battlefield and the
    battle shades. The first time a character becomes staggered or any
    time one drops to 0 hit points, add a broken shade mook to the
    fight. Add it to an existing mob if possible.

[Counteractions]{.underline}

Player characters expecting to deal with battle shades can take
precautions.

-   Ritual casting certain spells like the cleric\'s *turn undead* or an
    appropriate Terrain Caster spell from the druid could return the
    battle area to normal for the duration of the battle.

    -   Players may think to try this during combat instead of
        > beforehand. If they do so, they should make a normal (11+)
        > saving throw at the beginning of each round. If they succeed,
        > the battlefield effect is suppressed. If they fail, it
        > activates like normal that turn.

-   The obvious icon relationship advantages that could help are the
    Religious and Undead Icons, but players may be able to justify
    others. A six, along with a bit of a description should nullify the
    battlefield effects. A five would nullify the effect but create some
    other complication; for example, summoning the attention of the
    Undead Icon's servants!

#### Bloody Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 2nd    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Blood spikes +7 vs. AC**---10 damage           | * | 6 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 4 damage.                   |   | 1 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **R: Terrible blood +6 vs. PD**---8 negative     | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 4 ongoing negative energy    | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Blood of the fallen:* When a bloody shade dies, | * |   |
|          | one random nearby non-mook ally regains 2d6 hp.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Broken Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +1                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 2nd    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Rusty broken weapon +7 vs AC**---5 damage      | * | 6 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 2--5 miss:* If there is at least one    |   | 1 |
| Undead   | non-mook ally of the broken shade still in the   | * | 3 |
|          | fight, add another broken shade to the mob.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Amorphous Material:* Broken shades do not take  | D | 0 |
|          | miss damage from weapons.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Collective Strength:* When a member of the mob  | * |   |
|          | dies, other broken shades gain +1 to damage      | M |   |
|          | until the end of the battle (max +4)             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Archer Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +7                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | **Scrap dagger +7 vs AC**---7 damage             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 1-6:* The archer shade can use its      | * | 6 |
| Archer   | *earthen assault* ability this turn.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | **R: Rain of ghostly arrows +8 vs PD (1d3 nearby | * | 4 |
|          | or faraway enemies in a group)**---8 negative    | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural 1-6 with its first attack roll:* The    | * |   |
|          | archer shade can use its *earthen assault*       | * |   |
|          | ability this turn.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Earthen assault:* As a quick action, the archer | * |   |
|          | shade may disappear from the battlefield,        | M |   |
|          | melding into the ground. At the start of its     | D |   |
|          | next turn it reappears nearby as a move action.  | * |   |
|          | Attacks made the turn it reappears gain a +2     | * |   |
|          | attack bonus and +2 to damage.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Only when triggered by *scrap     | * |   |
|          | dagger* or *rain of ghostly arrows*.             | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blade Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 3rd    | **Rusty blades +8 vs AC**---10 damage            | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 1-6:* The battle shade can use its      | * | 6 |
| Troop    | *earthen assault* ability this turn.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Earthen assault:* As a quick action, the battle | * | 3 |
|          | shade may disappear from the battlefield,        | * |   |
|          | melding into the ground. At the start of its     | P | 4 |
|          | next turn it reappears nearby as a move action.  | D | 0 |
|          | Attacks made the turn it reappears gain a +2     | * |   |
|          | attack bonus and +2 to damage.                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Only when triggered by *rusty     | * |   |
|          | blades*.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Scream from beyond +7 vs. MD (1d3 nearby    | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---7 negative energy damage            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Special trigger:* Use as a free action when a   | * |   |
|          | creature in the battle scores a critical hit.    | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Slaughter Pit Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | **Cracking blades +9 vs AC**---28 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Deal 25 damage to the        | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | slaughter pit shade; then add a 3rd level      | * |   |
|          | battle shade OR a 3rd level archer shade to    |   | 1 |
| Undead   | the battle that will act 1d6 initiative counts   | * | 3 |
|          | after the slaughter pit shade acted. Treat this  | * |   |
|          | battle or archer shade as if it had used its     | P | 1 |
|          | *earthen assault* ability, so that it starts off | D | 6 |
|          | the table and reappears where it likes nearby    | * | 0 |
|          | the slaughter pit shade.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 7 damage                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *All are one:* When a nearby non-mook undead     | M |   |
|          | ally drops to 0 hit points, the slaughter pit    | D |   |
|          | shade immediately removes one ongoing condition. | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### The Bonded

#### Bonded Hero

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | **Sword-tip claws +7 vs. AC**---15 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Make the bonded's    | * | 6 |
| Wrecker  | special attack as a quick action.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| C        | [Special Attack (choose one per bonded           | * | 5 |
| onstruct | hero)]{.underline}                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **C: Energy shroud +9 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or      | D | 3 |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---15 ongoing fire  | * | 5 |
|          | or cold damage                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Hex hammer +9 vs. AC**---20 force damage, and  | * |   |
|          | the target pops free and is stunned until the    | * |   |
|          | start of their next turn                         | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **Touch of the divine +9 vs. AC (vs 1 or 2       | * |   |
|          | engaged enemies)**---15 holy damage              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Mystic shield +9 vs. AC**---20 thunder damage  | * |   |
|          | and the bonded's AC and PD increase by +1 (to a  | * |   |
|          | maximum of +3) until the end of the battle       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | **R: Storm gaze +9 vs. AC**---20 lightning       | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Make a second *storm gaze*   |   |   |
|          | attack against a new target.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bonded Veil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Fluttering shroud +12 vs. AC**---30 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The bonded pops free and     | * | 6 |
| Troop    | flies until the end of its turn as a free        | * |   |
|          | action. It must land at the end of its turn, or  |   | 1 |
| C        | take falling damage.                             | * | 6 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 20:* The target becomes weakened and    | P | 1 |
|          | vulnerable (save ends), and the bonded can fly   | D | 4 |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Special, once per battle:* The bonded makes     | * |   |
|          | this attack as a free action on somebody else's  | M |   |
|          | turn.                                            | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Cut to ribbons +10 vs. AC (4 attacks)**---20   | * |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The bonded must pop  | * |   |
|          | free and as a free action move into engagement   | H |   |
|          | with a different enemy it has not already        | P |   |
|          | attacked this turn, then continues its *cut to   | * |   |
|          | ribbons* attack if it still has any of its four  | * |   |
|          | attacks left. If there are no other enemies that |   |   |
|          | can be attacked, the *cut to ribbons* attack     |   |   |
|          | ends.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Special, once per battle:* The bonded makes     |   |   |
|          | this attack as a free action on somebody else's  |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Veiled:* Until the bonded is hit, it has a +4   |   |   |
|          | bonus to all defenses.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bonded Arcane Archer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | **Fast strike +13 vs. AC**---40 damage and the   | A |   |
| level    | bonded makes an *arrows of fate* attack as a     | C | 1 |
|          | quick action                                     | * | 9 |
| Archer   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Arrows of fate +13 vs. AC**---40 force      |   | 1 |
| C        | damage, and the arcane archer can make another   | * | 9 |
| onstruct | *arrows of fate* attack as a quick action. Each  | * |   |
|          | enemy can only be targeted once by an *arrows of | P | 3 |
|          | fate* attack on each of the bonded's turns.      | D | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Doesn't provoke:* This bonded can make ranged   | * |   |
|          | attacks in melee and not provoke attacks from    | * |   |
|          | those that it is engaged with. When leaving      | M |   |
|          | engagement the bonded does not provoke attacks.  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Overwatch:* As a move action if the bonded      | * |   |
|          | isn't engaged it can declare a creature or item  |   |   |
|          | or point on the battlefield to be the target of  | * |   |
|          | its overwatch. If before its next turn an enemy  | * |   |
|          | moves close to the focus of the overwatch, the   | H |   |
|          | bonded can make the following attack on the      | P |   |
|          | triggering enemy:                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Overwatch shot +12 vs. AC (the triggering   |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---60 force damage and the target loses  |   |   |
|          | the rest of its move action                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bonded Hexknight

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 7th    | **Fists of steel +13 vs. AC (1d3 attacks)**---60 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Troop    | *Natural even miss:* The bonded's crit range     | * |   |
|          | expands by a cumulative 1 (to a maximum of 16+)  |   | 1 |
| C        | until the end of the battle.                     | * | 9 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* Make a *whirling steel*      | P | 2 |
|          | attack as a move action, unless you have already | D | 8 |
|          | used the bonded's move action this turn.         | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Whirling steel +13 vs. AC (one nearby       |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---30 damage and the bonded pulls the    | * |   |
|          | target into engagement with it                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Puissance:* This bonded's attacks ignore any    | * |   |
|          | sort of damage reduction or avoidance. You can't |   |   |
|          | make it re-roll the attack, teleport away to     | * |   |
|          | avoid damage, take half damage due to an         | * |   |
|          | ability, etc. If it rolls well enough to hit you | H |   |
|          | then you take the full damage, end of story.     | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bonded Prophet

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Smite the unworthy, bless the worthy +18 vs.   | A |   |
| level    | AC (1d4 engaged enemies or allies the bonded is  | C | 1 |
|          | touching)**---50 force damage                    | * | 8 |
| Leader   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hit against ally:* Instead of taking 50 damage, |   | 2 |
| C        | the target heals 30 damage. Each ally can only   | * | 1 |
| onstruct | benefit from this healing once per battle.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 4 |
|          | **R: Eerie radiance +18 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or    | D | 2 |
|          | faraway enemies or dead allies)**---30 damage    | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hit against dead ally:* If the attack beat the  |   |   |
|          | PD of a dead ally, instead of taking damage the  | * |   |
|          | ally returns to life with 20 hp (or their        | * |   |
|          | maximum hp if it is lower than 20). Each ally    | M |   |
|          | can only be targeted by eerie radiance once per  | D |   |
|          | battle. This effect only works on allies who     | * |   |
|          | have died during the battle.                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Maladiction+18 vs. MD (one nearby or        | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---70 damage, and the next ally  | * |   |
|          | of the bonded prophet to hit the target heals    | H |   |
|          | 4d10 hp                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Returned saints:* The bonded's eerie radiance   |   |   |
|          | also works against long-dead creatures, even     |   |   |
|          | returning corpses that are no more than dust and |   |   |
|          | bones to full life. GMs beware, this is a very   |   |   |
|          | nasty special if the bonded prophet happens to   |   |   |
|          | be standing in a graveyard at the time.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Divine retribution:* The bonded prophet's       |   |   |
|          | mighty smite is even mightier if the PC has      |   |   |
|          | violated some taboo, broken a sacred law, or     |   |   |
|          | transgressed into a holy place. The attack deals |   |   |
|          | an additional 20 force damage, hit or miss, even |   |   |
|          | on a 1.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bonded Warlock

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Spell-breath +18 vs. AC (1d4 engaged           | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---50 force damage                     | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target is        | * |   |
|          | teleported to the far side of the battlefield,   |   | 2 |
| C        | and hampered (save ends).                        | * | 1 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* Make a *violent dispelling*   | P | 4 |
|          | attack as a quick action against the target, if  | D | 3 |
|          | it hits it does no damage but does dispel spells | * | 0 |
|          | and spell-like effects.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Violent dispelling +18 vs. MD (one nearby   | * |   |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---70 damage, and any         | * |   |
|          | spell-like effects on the target or caused by    | M |   |
|          | the target end                                   | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Hexplosion +18 vs. the lowest PD in the     | * |   |
|          | group of targets (1d3 nearby or faraway enemies  |   |   |
|          | in a group)**---90 damage, split evenly (rounded | * |   |
|          | down) between all targets hit                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target is dazed  | P |   |
|          | (easy save, 6+, ends).                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* Make a *violent dispelling*   |   |   |
|          | attack as a quick action against the target, if  |   |   |
|          | it hits it does no damage but does dispel spells |   |   |
|          | and spell-like effects.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spell absorption:* Once per battle when a spell |   |   |
|          | not granted by a talent hits the bonded, it has  |   |   |
|          | no effect. Later in the battle as a quick action |   |   |
|          | the bonded can cast the spell that hit it, using |   |   |
|          | the original caster's attack and damage bonuses. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Warlock's warp:* When one of the bonded's       |   |   |
|          | attacks misses all targets, the bonded teleports |   |   |
|          | as a free action.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Violent undoing:* The bonded's *violent         |   |   |
|          | dispelling* attack "dispels" all manner of       |   |   |
|          | useful conditions, such as a rogue having        |   |   |
|          | momentum or a fighter having a higher crit       |   |   |
|          | range. In particular, this higher-strength       |   |   |
|          | version of the attack shuts down that really     |   |   |
|          | irritating effect that's always being used by    |   |   |
|          | that one character.                              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Bone Imp

#### Bone Imp Mage-Eater

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 2nd    | **Frenzied teeth +6 vs. AC**---4 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Freakish speed:* On rounds when the escalation  | * | 2 |
| Mook     | die is odd the imp may move as a quick action    | * |   |
|          | once on its turn, flapping its wings madly as it |   | 1 |
| Demon    | dashes about.                                    | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist magic 13+:* This creature has *resist    | P | 4 |
|          | damage 13+* to all damage from magic sources     | D |   |
|          | (even magic weapons). When a magic attack        | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Weakling:* When building battles using this     | M |   |
|          | monster, it counts as half a normal monster. And | D |   |
|          | that's half a normal mook!                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Magic eater:* When this imp resists magic while | * |   |
|          | the escalation die is odd, it takes no damage    | H |   |
|          | instead of half damage, and the crit range for   | P |   |
|          | all bone imp mage-eaters' attacks expand by 1    | * |   |
|          | (to a maximum of 6+) until the end of the        | * |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bone Imp Archer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | **Bone claws +8 vs. AC**---10 damage             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **R: Ossifying arrow +8 vs. AC**---6 damage and  | * | 3 |
| Archer   | the target is stuck (save ends). Each time the   | * |   |
|          | target fails to save they take damage equal to   |   | 1 |
| Demon    | twice the escalation die value.                  | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Freakish speed:* On rounds when the escalation  | P | 4 |
|          | die is odd the imp may move as a quick action    | D | 5 |
|          | once on its turn, flapping its wings madly as it | * |   |
|          | dashes about.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist magic 13+:* This creature has *resist    | M |   |
|          | damage 13+* to all damage from magic sources     | D |   |
|          | (even magic weapons). When a magic attack        | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bone Imp Tormentor

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 3rd    | **Bone-dissolving bite +7 vs. AC**---3 damage,   | A |   |
| level    | and 5 ongoing acid damage                        | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Spoiler  | **R: Bone dust +7 vs. PD**---7 negative damage,  | * |   |
|          | and the target chooses between being dazed (save |   | 1 |
| Demon    | ends) OR taking a --1 penalty to all defenses    | * | 6 |
|          | until the end of the battle (cumulative to --4). | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Tormentor's mark:* Once per battle when the     | D | 8 |
|          | tormentor imp hits with a natural even attack    | * |   |
|          | roll it does an extra 2d6 ongoing acid damage    | * |   |
|          | (easy save 6+ ends).                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Freakish leap:* On rounds when the escalation   | * |   |
|          | die is odd the imp may fly as a quick action     | M |   |
|          | once on its turn, landing at the end of its      | D |   |
|          | movement.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist magic 13+:* This creature has *resist    | * |   |
|          | damage 13+* to all damage from magic sources     | H |   |
|          | (even magic weapons). When a magic attack        | P |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | * |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bone Imp Skullbiter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Marrow-seeking tongue +9 vs. AC**---14 damage, | A |   |
| level    | or 20 damage vs. a staggered target              | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Troop    | **C: Bone splinters +8 vs. AC (1d3 nearby or     | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---10 damage        |   | 1 |
| Demon    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | *Freakish speed:* On rounds when the escalation  | * |   |
|          | die is odd the imp may move as a quick action    | P | 6 |
|          | once on its turn, flapping its wings madly as it | D | 0 |
|          | dashes about.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist magic 13+:* This creature has *resist    | * |   |
|          | damage 13+* to all damage from magic sources     | M |   |
|          | (even magic weapons). When a magic attack        | D |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | * |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Briar Elf

[Environmental Effects]{.underline}

Before the battle, roll a d4 to determine which environmental effect
will show up during the fight. Then roll a d3 for the minimum escalation
die value that triggers the effect at the start of the round and stays
in effect the rest of the battle.

In the unlikely event that PCs have managed to find or lure briar elves
outside the briar elf's forested places of power, these effects probably
wouldn't apply.

[Humanoid Briar Elves]{.underline}

**1. Snares**---Enemies who take more than two actions on their turn
while on the ground must save (11+) or be whipped into mid-air by a
snare trap and hung upside-down (stuck & --2 attack penalty), it is a
standard action to free oneself or an ally. (GM: Choose how many snares
you want set before the fight, probably the number of PCs plus or minus
1.)

**2. Pit traps**---The briar elves have created spike-lined pits
disguised with forest-floor litter. If you roll a natural 1--5 on d20
roll you must save (11+) or become stuck (move action to end) and take
your level × d6 damage.

**3. Blowdarts**---More briar elves are lurking on the edge of the
fight, just out of sight. If a PC rolls lower than the escalation die
value on any natural d20 roll they take poison damage equal to their
level.

**4. Gruesome display**---The whirl of battle has revealed some fresh
corpses desecrated by the briar elves and impaled in the trees. Story
consequences are best here: it can be someone the PCs cared about.

[Plant Briar Elves]{.underline}

**1. Grasping grasses**---Disengage checks by non-plant creatures and
non-briar elves take a --5 penalty.

**2. Cutting leaves**---Adventurers must save (11+) when they move or
take damage equal to twice their level.

**3. Crushing vines**---Any adventurer who doesn't move on their turn
takes their level in damage.

**4. Thorny plants**---Each time an adventurer becomes staggered they
also take damage equal to their level times the escalation die value.

[Undead Briar Elves]{.underline}

**1. Whispers of the past**---PCs have a --2 penalty to MD and PD, as
overlapping ghostly whispers cause pain and anxiety.

**2. Ghostly terrain**---On rounds when the escalation die is odd the
PCs are stuck, unable to move due to ghost trees that suddenly block
their paths.

**3. Spectral hands**---PCs take a --1 penalty to attack rolls, as
ghostly thorn-pierced hands grab at them.

**4. Fearful destiny**---PCs who could normally resist fear effects
cannot do so for the duration of this battle. PCs who cannot normally
resist fear take a --2 penalty to their saves whenever they are affected
by fear.

#### Briar Elf Slayer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Thorn claws +11 vs. AC**---14 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 7 ongoing poison damage.     | * | 0 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* The ongoing poison damage can't be saved |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | against while the briar elf that inflicted it    | * | 8 |
|          | still lives and is in the battle.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Counterstrike:* When the briar elf is targeted  | D | 0 |
|          | by an opportunity attack, it makes a thorn claws | * | 0 |
|          | attack against the creature that is targeting it | * |   |
|          | first.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Humanoid:* The briar elf can make the following | D |   |
|          | ranged attack:                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Bramble bow +11 vs. AC (1 nearby or faraway |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---14 damage                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\]. This  | H |   |
|          | monster has *resist weapons 16+* (weapon attacks | P |   |
|          | that roll less than a natural 16 deal only half  | * |   |
|          | damage).                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | Provided it is next to a tree, this monster can  |   |   |
|          | teleport to a different nearby tree as a move    |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Thorny carapace:* When an attacker misses this  |   |   |
|          | monster with a melee attack, the attacker takes  |   |   |
|          | 12 damage.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 30 hp are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dark escalator:* On turns when the escalation   |   |   |
|          | die is even the briar elf slayer uses the        |   |   |
|          | escalation die, and any enemy engaged with it    |   |   |
|          | does not.                                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Barbed Vines

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Rip and tear +12 vs. AC (1d3 + 1               | * | 6 |
| Mook     | enemies)**---10 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Plant    | *Rooted in place:* Barbed vines can't move and   | * | 0 |
|          | can't be moved, at least not until they're dead  | * |   |
|          | and chopped down.                                | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Expanding reach:* The barbed vines can make its | * |   |
|          | rip and tear attack against engaged enemies when | * |   |
|          | the escalation die is 0, nearby enemies when the |   |   |
|          | escalation die is 1--3, and when the escalation  | * |   |
|          | die is 4+ the vines can reach anywhere in the    | * |   |
|          | battle.                                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Mobile roots:* They can move, but they still    |   |   |
|          | can't be moved.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Elf Stalker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Whip of thorns +13 vs. AC**---20 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * | 1 |
| Archer   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* 5 ongoing damage.             |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: Barbed arrows +14 vs. AC**---25 damage      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The briar elf can    | * |   |
|          | *green walk* as a move action instead of a       |   |   |
|          | standard action this turn.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Green walk:* Provided the briar elf stalker is  | M |   |
|          | next to a tree, as a standard action they can    | D |   |
|          | step into the tree and disappear. At the start   | * |   |
|          | of their next turn they reappear next to another | * |   |
|          | nearby tree, and hit or miss their attack does   |   |   |
|          | double damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Humanoid (default):* Twice per battle, make a   | * |   |
|          | *barbed arrows* attack as a quick action.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\]. Once  |   |   |
|          | per battle when this monster reappears after its |   |   |
|          | *green walk* it does triple damage instead of    |   |   |
|          | double damage.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | Once per battle when the escalation die is 4+,   |   |   |
|          | this monster green walks it immediately gets     |   |   |
|          | another turn.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Strength of the forest:* When this monster      |   |   |
|          | green walks it heals 1d4 × 10 hit points.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 48 hp are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Tree

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Ripping briars +14 vs. AC (each engaged        | * | 3 |
| Leader   | enemy)**---35 damage                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Plant    | **C: Waves of anguish +14 vs. MD (1d3 nearby     | * | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---40 psychic damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit or miss, and a briar elf is     | D | 8 |
|          | engaged with the target:* The briar elf heals 20 | * | 0 |
|          | hp.                                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Rooted in place:* Briar trees can't move and    | * |   |
|          | can't be moved, at least not until they're dead  | * |   |
|          | and chopped down.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Sheltering thorns:* When a briar elf next to a  | * |   |
|          | briar tree takes damage, half that damage is     | * |   |
|          | dealt to the tree instead.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Mobile roots:* They can move, but they still    | P |   |
|          | can't be moved.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Elf Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Thorn claws +14 vs. AC**---40 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 15 ongoing poison damage.    | * | 3 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* The ongoing poison damage can't be saved |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | against while the briar elf that inflicted it    | * | 1 |
|          | still lives and is in the battle.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *The poison builds:* For each nearby enemy that  | D | 0 |
|          | is taking ongoing damage, the briar elf          | * | 0 |
|          | warrior's attacks deal an additional 10 poison   | * |   |
|          | damage, hit or miss.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Humanoid (default):* The briar elf can make the | D |   |
|          | following ranged attack:                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Bramble bow +14 vs. AC (1 nearby or faraway |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---40 damage                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\]. This  | H |   |
|          | monster has *resist weapons 16+* (weapon attacks | P |   |
|          | that roll less than a natural 16 deal only half  | * |   |
|          | damage).                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | Provided it is next to a tree, this monster can  |   |   |
|          | teleport to a different nearby tree as a move    |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Thorny carapace:* When an attacker misses this  |   |   |
|          | monster with a melee attack, the attacker takes  |   |   |
|          | 24 damage.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 60 hp are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dark escalator:* On turns when the escalation   |   |   |
|          | die is even the briar elf warrior uses the       |   |   |
|          | escalation die, and any enemy engaged with it    |   |   |
|          | does not.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Poison is life:* The briar elf warrior has +4   |   |   |
|          | to all its defenses against attacks by creatures |   |   |
|          | suffering ongoing poison damage.                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Elf Sorcerer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | **Blood to sap +15 vs. PD**---60 poison damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* The target becomes vulnerable | * | 4 |
| Caster   | to *flesh to bark* until the end of the battle.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **C: Flesh to bark +16 vs. PD**---50 poison      | * | 2 |
|          | damage and the target is stuck (save ends)       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Crit:* The target must make last gasp saves, as | D | 2 |
|          | it struggles to avoid turning into a tree.       | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Storm of thorns +16 vs. PD (1d3 enemies in  |   |   |
|          | a group)**---40 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* 20 ongoing poison damage.     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Forest-shape:* The briar elf sorcerer can cause |   |   |
|          | trees to reshape themselves or to spontaneously  | * |   |
|          | grow from the ground. Once per battle the briar  | * |   |
|          | elf sorcerer can use this ability as a free      | H |   |
|          | action: to stop another character mid-movement,  | P |   |
|          | to pop a creature free, or to block and cancel a | * |   |
|          | ranged attack.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Humanoid:* Once per battle, for one turn;       |   |   |
|          | *storm of thorns* becomes a quick action to use. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\]. Every |   |   |
|          | time the briar elf sorcerer misses with its      |   |   |
|          | *flesh to bark* attack, its crit range with that |   |   |
|          | attack expands by 1.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | This monster can phase through solid objects and |   |   |
|          | creatures, but cannot end its turn inside        |   |   |
|          | another object or creature. The monster          |   |   |
|          | automatically disengages when it moves, and      |   |   |
|          | cannot be intercepted (unless the creature       |   |   |
|          | intercepting it is also phasing).                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 72 hp are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dark escalator:* On turns when the escalation   |   |   |
|          | die is even, the briar elf sorcerer uses the     |   |   |
|          | escalation die, and each staggered adventurer    |   |   |
|          | does not.                                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Elf Assassin

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 11th   | **Whip of thorns +17 vs. AC**---40 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | * | 4 |
| Archer   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* 10 ongoing damage.            |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | **R: Barbed arrows +17 vs. AC**---50 damage      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The briar elf        | * |   |
|          | assassin can *green walk* as a move action       |   |   |
|          | instead of a standard action this turn.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Green walk:* Provided the briar elf assassin is | M |   |
|          | next to a tree, as a standard action they can    | D |   |
|          | step into the tree and disappear. At the start   | * |   |
|          | of their next turn they reappear next to another | * |   |
|          | nearby tree, and hit or miss their attack does   |   |   |
|          | double damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Humanoid:* Twice per battle make a *barbed      | * |   |
|          | arrows* attack as a quick action.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\]. Once  |   |   |
|          | per battle when this monster reappears after its |   |   |
|          | *green walk* it does triple damage instead of    |   |   |
|          | double damage.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | Once per battle when the escalation die is 4+    |   |   |
|          | and this monster *green walks* it immediately    |   |   |
|          | gets another turn.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Strength of the forest:* When this monster      |   |   |
|          | green walks it heals 1d4 × 20 hit points.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 96 hp are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Briar Elf Sovereign

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Thorny scepter +17 vs. AC**---100 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* 80 ongoing poison damage.     | * | 4 |
| Leader   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* When the target saves against the |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | poison damage it becomes dazed (--4 attack)      | * | 6 |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 7 |
|          | *Miss:* 50 damage.                               | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **C: Verdant evolution +18 vs. PD (one nearby    | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---80 poison damage and 50 ongoing       |   |   |
|          | poison damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* When the target saves against the | M |   |
|          | poison damage it becomes confused until the end  | D |   |
|          | of its next turn.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 18+ hit:* Until the end of the battle   |   |   |
|          | the target's saves against poison damage all     | * |   |
|          | become hard saves (16+).                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *The sovereign's orders:* When the escalation    | P |   |
|          | die is 1, as a free action the sovereign can     | * |   |
|          | cause an ally to reroll a missed attack and take | * |   |
|          | the better roll. When the escalation die value   |   |   |
|          | is 2 the sovereign can do this twice during the  |   |   |
|          | round. When the escalation die is 3+ the         |   |   |
|          | sovereign gets to order three attacks rerolled.  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Choose one]{.underline}                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Humanoid:* The sovereign has a magic item. You  |   |   |
|          | don't need to work out what the item is right    |   |   |
|          | now, just give it +2 to all its defenses, saves, |   |   |
|          | and attacks to represent a generic magical       |   |   |
|          | 'thing'. Once the battle is over the adventurers |   |   |
|          | can loot the body for a magic item, and you can  |   |   |
|          | reveal/decide what the item actually is.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Plant:* This monster's type is \[PLANT\].       |   |   |
|          | Whenever the briar elf sovereign is standing on  |   |   |
|          | soil and doesn't move on its turn it heals 14    |   |   |
|          | hit points.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead:* This monster's type is \[UNDEAD\].     |   |   |
|          | Other undead refuse to fight this monster (sorry |   |   |
|          | necromancers). Cleric attack spells that target  |   |   |
|          | this monster only deal half damage on a hit.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Royal command:* The briar elf sovereign is no   |   |   |
|          | longer capped at three rerolls per round from    |   |   |
|          | *the sovereign's orders*---it gets four when the |   |   |
|          | escalation die is 4, five rerolls when the       |   |   |
|          | escalation die is 5, and can order six allies a  |   |   |
|          | round to reroll their attacks once the           |   |   |
|          | escalation die reaches 6.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with this briar elf |   |   |
|          | who have fewer than 120 hp are dazed (--4        |   |   |
|          | attack) and can't use the escalation die.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dark escalator:* On turns when the escalation   |   |   |
|          | die is even the briar elves uses the escalation  |   |   |
|          | die, and their enemies do not.                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Bulette

#### Bulette

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +7                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 5th    | **Gigantic claws +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | *Dual hit:* If both claws hit during the same    | * |   |
|          | turn, the bulette can make a *terrible bite*     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | attack during its next turn as a standard        | * | 4 |
|          | action.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Terrible bite +14 vs.    | D | 7 |
|          | AC**---45 damage                                 | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 22 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Blood frenzy:* The bulette's crit range expands | * |   |
|          | to 16+ while the escalation die is 4+.           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Serious burrower:* A bulette can burrow         | * |   |
|          | incredibly quickly for short distances. They're  | * |   |
|          | renowned for the mounds of dirt and rock they    |   |   |
|          | push above them as they surge through the ground | * |   |
|          | like land torpedoes.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Savage response:* When an attacker scores a     | * |   |
|          | critical hit against the bulette and it          |   |   |
|          | survives, the bulette can make a *terrible bite* |   |   |
|          | attack as a free action against one target       |   |   |
|          | engaged with it.                                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Green Bulette

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Charging maw +12 vs. AC**---30 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* The target pops free from    | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | all enemies engaged with it and is vulnerable to  | * |   |
|           | all attacks (save ends).                          |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *Leaping bite:* The green bulette gains a +3      | * |   |
|           | bonus to attack and damage with its first attack  | P | 9 |
|           | each battle.                                      | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Into the earth:* The first time each round an    | * |   |
|           | attack hits the bulette, it can choose to hunker  |   |   |
|           | down as a free action. If it does, it gains a +3  | * |   |
|           | bonus to AC and PD until the start of its next    | * |   |
|           | turn. Force attacks and opportunity attacks don't | M |   |
|           | trigger this ability. If the green bulette        | D |   |
|           | hunkers down while it's moving (for example, from | * |   |
|           | a readied action), its movement ends that turn.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Blood-frenzy escalator:* While at least one      | * |   |
|           | creature in the battle is staggered or            | * |   |
|           | unconscious, the bulette gains a bonus to its     | H |   |
|           | attacks and damage equal to the escalation die    | P |   |
|           | but can't use *into the earth*. Creatures that    | * |   |
|           | have no blood (constructs, oozes, plant           | * |   |
|           | creatures, etc.) don't trigger this ability.      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Occasional burrower:* Like all bulettes, the     |   |   |
|           | green bulette can burrow. While above ground, it  |   |   |
|           | prefers to move slowly on the surface and rely on |   |   |
|           | its plant- and soil-covered shell to stay hidden  |   |   |
|           | until it attacks.                                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lumberland Dirt-Fisher

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 5th    | **Tongue lash and bite +14 vs. AC (1d3 nearby    | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---30 damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | **R: Sticky tongue +15 vs. PD**---20 damage      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from    | * | 1 |
|          | all enemies engaged with it, is pulled into the  | * |   |
|          | pit with the dirt-fisher (who engages it), and   | P | 1 |
|          | loses its next move action. Climbing out of the  | D | 3 |
|          | pit requires a move action and a DC 20 check. If | * | 5 |
|          | the bulette is not in its pit, the bulette pulls | * |   |
|          | the target to itself and engages it.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hole digger:* A dirt-fisher can burrow          | * |   |
|          | incredibly quickly for short distances, but it   | M |   |
|          | prefers to attack from within its pre-dug        | D |   |
|          | trap-door pit. It usually has a few pits dug     | * |   |
|          | nearby if forced to leave its current pit.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Into the earth:* The first time each round an   | * |   |
|          | attack hits the dirt-fisher, it can hunker down  | * |   |
|          | and pull the lid on its pit shut. If it does, it | H |   |
|          | gains a +3 bonus to all defenses until the start | P |   |
|          | of its next turn, and any creature in the pit    | * |   |
|          | takes a --5 penalty to checks to climb out of    | * |   |
|          | the pit. Force attacks and opportunity attacks   |   |   |
|          | don't trigger this ability.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Nowhere to run:* The dirt-fisher deals double   |   |   |
|          | damage against creatures engaged with it in its  |   |   |
|          | pit.                                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ravenous Bumoorah

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 5th    | **Land-shark maw +15 vs. AC**---14 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 10 thunder  | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Blood-frenzy escalator:* While at least one     | * | 1 |
|          | creature in the battle is staggered or           | * |   |
|          | unconscious, the bulette gains a bonus to its    | P | 4 |
|          | attacks and damage equal to the escalation die.  | D | 6 |
|          | Creatures that have no blood (constructs, oozes, | * |   |
|          | plant creatures, etc.) don't trigger this        | * |   |
|          | ability.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Earth surge:* Whenever the bumoorah takes       | * |   |
|          | damage from an attack, it rolls a save; on a 16+ | M |   |
|          | it can immediately dive beneath the ground,      | D |   |
|          | preventing further attacks against it until it   | * |   |
|          | surfaces at the start of its next turn. Force    | * |   |
|          | attacks and opportunity attacks don't trigger    |   |   |
|          | this ability.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Serious burrower:* The bumoorah can burrow      | H |   |
|          | incredibly quickly for short distances.          | P |   |
|          | Bumoorahs are renowned for the dust-spurts and   | * |   |
|          | vibrating sound they generate as they shoot      | * |   |
|          | through the ground like hungry spears.           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Deep Bulette

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Pulverizing maw +15 vs. AC (1d3                | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---90 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | *Miss:* 45 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Blood frenzy:* The deep bulette's crit range    | * | 9 |
|          | expands by 4 while the escalation die is 4+.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Tunnel fighter:* While fighting in a tunnel     | D | 7 |
|          | with nowhere for its enemies to move but ahead   | * | 8 |
|          | of it, the deep bulette gains the following      | * |   |
|          | abilities based on the escalation die:           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Escalation die is odd:* When the bulette hits   | * |   |
|          | an enemy engaged with it with an attack, that    | M |   |
|          | target pops free from it and is hampered (save   | D |   |
|          | ends).                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Escalation die is even:* The deep bulette       |   |   |
|          | engages each nearby enemy in front of it as it   | * |   |
|          | pushes its bulk inexorably forward down the      | * |   |
|          | tunnel. Enemies pushed ahead of it this way      | H |   |
|          | don't get to make opportunity attacks.           | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Centaur

#### Centaur Lancer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Charging lance +10 vs. AC**---15 damage, and    | A |   |
| level     | the target pops free from the centaur             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Troop     | *Hit 'em hard:* The crit range of the attack      | * |   |
|           | expands by 2 and instead deals 20 damage on a hit |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | if the centaur first moves before attacking an    | * | 4 |
|           | enemy it wasn't engaged with at the start of its  | * |   |
|           | turn.                                             | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is also dazed until the | * |   |
|           | end of its next turn.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Spear +9 vs. AC**---13 damage                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The centaur lancer can make a | M |   |
|           | *kick* attack as a free action.                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Kick +8 vs. PD (1d2 enemies engaged with the    | * |   |
|           | centaur)**---The target takes 5 damage and pops   |   |   |
|           | free from the centaur.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Harnessed speed:* The centaur lancer gains a +4  | H |   |
|           | AC bonus against opportunity attacks.             | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Centaur Raider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Hoof and weapon +10 vs. AC**---15 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* As a free action, the centaur | * | 9 |
| Wrecker   | raider can move and make another *hoof and        | * |   |
|           | weapon* attack against a different nearby enemy   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | (it will take opportunity attacks for moving).    | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Short bow +9 vs. AC**---18 damage            | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The centaur raider can take an     | * |   |
|           | additional move action this turn.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Harnessed speed:* The centaur raider gains a +4  | * |   |
|           | AC bonus against opportunity attacks and only     | * |   |
|           | takes half damage from opportunity attacks that   | M |   |
|           | hit it.                                           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Barreling charge:* When the escalation die is    | * |   |
|           | even, the centaur raider can use a standard       | * |   |
|           | action and a move action to make a *sweeping      | H |   |
|           | blow* attack against multiple enemies as it moves | P |   |
|           | past them (it will take opportunity attacks). It  | * |   |
|           | ends this move and attack unengaged.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Sweeping blow +10 vs. AC (1d3 nearby            |   |   |
|           | enemies)**---15 damage, and the target loses its  |   |   |
|           | next move action.                                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Centaur Champion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Two-handed sword +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---20 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Leader   | *Champion's challenge:* If the centaur champion  | * |   |
|          | scores a crit against the target, it can         |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | challenge that enemy. If it does, until the end  | * | 6 |
|          | of the battle the champion and the target each   | * |   |
|          | take a --4 attack penalty against any target     | P | 1 |
|          | except the other. If the centaur champion dies   | D | 7 |
|          | or challenges a new foe, the old challenge is    | * | 0 |
|          | canceled.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Crushing hooves +10 vs. PD (2 attacks)**---13  | * |   |
|          | damage, and the target is vulnerable until the   | * |   |
|          | start of its next turn                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Hooves and slash:* As a standard action, the    | * |   |
|          | centaur champion can make a *crushing hooves*    | * |   |
|          | attack and a single *two-handed sword* attack    |   |   |
|          | (one attack roll) against the same enemy.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Leader of the clan:* When the centaur champion  | H |   |
|          | engages an enemy, each other centaur ally        | P |   |
|          | engaged with that creature can pop free from it. | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Moving combatant:* The centaur champion gains a |   |   |
|          | +4 AC bonus against opportunity attacks and only |   |   |
|          | takes half damage from opportunity attacks that  |   |   |
|          | hit it. When an enemy makes an opportunity       |   |   |
|          | attack against it and misses, that enemy takes   |   |   |
|          | 20 damage from a counter-attack.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Chief's challenge:* When the champion issues a  |   |   |
|          | *champion's challenge*, it only takes a --2      |   |   |
|          | attack penalty against other enemies than its    |   |   |
|          | chosen foe, but that enemy still takes the --4   |   |   |
|          | attack penalty. In addition, the champion can    |   |   |
|          | use *champion's challenge* as a free action when |   |   |
|          | it becomes staggered.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Champion's scorn:* Each of the champion's       |   |   |
|          | centaur allies in the battle gains a +5 damage   |   |   |
|          | bonus with ranged attacks.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Centaur Ranger

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Twin scimitars +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---10    | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| Archer    | **R: Longbow +11 vs. AC**---20 damage             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even hit:* The centaur ranger can take   | * | 6 |
|           | an additional move action this turn.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The centaur ranger can make a      | D | 5 |
|           | second (but not a third) *longbow* attack this    | * |   |
|           | turn as a free action.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Moving combatant:* The centaur ranger gains a +4 | * |   |
|           | AC bonus against opportunity attacks and only     | * |   |
|           | takes half damage from opportunity attacks that   | M |   |
|           | hit it. When an enemy makes an opportunity attack | D |   |
|           | against it and misses, that enemy takes 10 damage | * |   |
|           | from a counter-attack.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Terrain familiarity:* Once each round when the   | * |   |
|           | escalation die is odd, the centaur ranger can     | * |   |
|           | make use of the area's terrain to its advantage   | H |   |
|           | as a free action. It can choose either to gain a  | P |   |
|           | +2 attack bonus for its attacks that turn, or to  | * |   |
|           | gain a +2 bonus to all defenses against the next  | * |   |
|           | attack that targets it by using a flashy or       |   |   |
|           | tricky maneuver (leaping off a rock over an       |   |   |
|           | enemy, stirring up a hornet's nest near an        |   |   |
|           | attacker, etc.). The target of its attack or a    |   |   |
|           | creature attacking it when it attempts this stunt |   |   |
|           | rolls a normal save; on a success, the bonus is   |   |   |
|           | negated.                                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **R: Pinning volley +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---8  |   |   |
|           | damage, and the target is hampered until the end  |   |   |
|           | of its next turn                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is stuck (save ends)    |   |   |
|           | instead of hampered.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Chaos Beast

#### Chaos Glorp

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 4th     | **Oozespasm +8 vs. AC**---3 ongoing damage, or 10 | A |   |
| level     | damage if the target is already taking ongoing    | C | 1 |
|           | damage                                            | * | 6 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* The chaos glorp pops free from all        |   | 1 |
| A         | enemies and moves as a free action to engage a    | * | 3 |
| berration | nearby enemy taking ongoing damage.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Spontaneous chaos:* When the escalation die      | D | 0 |
|           | reaches 6, the chaos glorp rolls a normal save.   | * |   |
|           | If it succeeds, it transforms into a chaos beast  | * |   |
|           | with full hit points.                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chaos Beast

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Bestial chaos +9 vs. AC**---Damage and effect   | A |   |
| level     | depends on the natural roll                       | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Troop     | *Natural even hit:* 7 damage, and the chaos beast | * |   |
|           | can make another *bestial chaos* attack as a free |   | 1 |
| A         | action.                                           | * | 7 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* 15 ongoing damage.             | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | *Miss:* The chaos beast pops free from all        | * |   |
|           | enemies and moves to engage a random nearby enemy | * |   |
|           | as a free action, preferably one it wasn't just   |   |   |
|           | engaged with.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chaos combined:* Once a chaos beast is           | M |   |
|           | staggered, it can combine with another chaos      | D |   |
|           | beast next to it as a quick action to become a    | * |   |
|           | full-strength chaos brute acting on this beast's  | * |   |
|           | initiative. Replace the other beast with a chaos  |   |   |
|           | glorp mook.                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chaos Brute

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Brute chaos +9 vs. AC**---Damage and effect     | A |   |
| level     | depends on the natural roll                       | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | *Natural even hit:* 25 damage.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| A         | *Natural odd hit:* 15 ongoing damage.             | * | 3 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 1d3 random nearby enemies each take 10    | P | 6 |
|           | psychic damage.                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chaos combined:* Once a chaos brute is           | * |   |
|           | staggered, it can combine with another chaos      |   |   |
|           | brute or chaos beast\* next to it as a quick      | * |   |
|           | action to become a full-strength chaos behemoth:  | * |   |
|           | the new creature rolls initiative as if it had    | M |   |
|           | just entered the battle.                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | If a chaos beast and a chaos brute combine to     | * |   |
|           | create a chaos behemoth, the behemoth starts with |   |   |
|           | 70 hp instead of 90 hp and takes a --1 penalty to | * |   |
|           | all attacks and defenses.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chaos Behemoth

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge      | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | **Behemoth chaos +9 vs. AC**---Damage and effect  | A |   |
| level     | depends on the natural roll                       | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   | *Natural even hit:* 30 damage, and the chaos      | * |   |
|           | behemoth can make a *mewhowlwail* attack as a     |   | 1 |
| A         | free action.                                      | * | 6 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* 25 ongoing damage.             | P | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Miss:* 10 damage, and the target is hampered     | * |   |
|           | until the end of its next turn.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Mewhowlwail +9 vs. MD (each nearby              | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---10 psychic damage, and if the target   | * |   |
|           | is taking ongoing damage, saves against that      | M |   |
|           | ongoing damage become hard saves (16+)            | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *The betrayal of flesh:* When a nearby enemy      | * |   |
|           | taking ongoing damage drops to 0 hp or below, add |   |   |
|           | +15 to the amount of ongoing damage that enemy is | * |   |
|           | taking as its body melts and warps. At the GM's   | * |   |
|           | option, a creature slain in a battle involving a  | H |   |
|           | chaos behemoth might transform into a chaos glorp | P |   |
|           | or chaos beast instead of having the decency to   | * |   |
|           | just die.                                         | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Chimera

#### Iconic Chimera

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Fangs, claws, and horns +14 vs. AC (3          | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---25 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 14--15:* The target is dazed until the  | * |   |
|          | end of the chimera's next turn from a headbutt.  |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 7 |
|          | *Natural 16--17:* The target takes 20 ongoing    | * |   |
|          | damage from raking claws.                        | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *Natural 18--20:* The chimera can make a *fiery  | * | 0 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Fiery breath +14 vs. PD  | * |   |
|          | (up to 3 nearby enemies in a group)**---3d10     | * |   |
|          | fire damage                                      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Chimerical change:* At the start of battle each | * |   |
|          | PC rolls one icon relationship die of their      | * |   |
|          | choice and one die chosen from their             |   |   |
|          | relationships by the GM. A roll of 6 means the   | * |   |
|          | chimera has shifted in a manner that gives it a  | * |   |
|          | chimerical flaw (F) that the adventurers can     | H |   |
|          | exploit. A roll of a 5 indicates that the        | P |   |
|          | chimera gains both a flaw and a benefit          | * |   |
|          | associated with that icon. A result of 1 or 2    | * |   |
|          | means that the chimera gains the icon's          |   |   |
|          | chimerical benefit (B) without the flaw. Actual  |   |   |
|          | benefits and flaws are up to the GM, and should  |   |   |
|          | reflect the icons with which the players have    |   |   |
|          | relationships.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Magic Icon                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Bearded spell-eating head:* When a      |   |   |
|          | spell attack misses the chimera, it has no miss  |   |   |
|          | effect and the chimera heals 40 hp.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Vulnerability, melee:* The crit range   |   |   |
|          | of melee attacks against the chimera expands by  |   |   |
|          | 2.                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Zealous Icon                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Skin of indomitable faces:* When the    |   |   |
|          | chimera saves against a condition, it becomes    |   |   |
|          | immune to that condition until the end of the    |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Vulnerability, spells:* The crit range  |   |   |
|          | of spell attacks against the chimera expands by  |   |   |
|          | 2.                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Demonic Icon                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Flaming oil glands:* When a creature is |   |   |
|          | engaged with the chimera at the start of its     |   |   |
|          | turn, it takes 20 fire damage.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Overconfident predator:* Each time the  |   |   |
|          | chimera scores a critical hit, it takes a        |   |   |
|          | cumulative --2 penalty to all defenses.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Underground Icon                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Stone-studded dermis:* Any damage dice  |   |   |
|          | that roll maximum damage against the chimera     |   |   |
|          | count as 1s.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Stubborn beast:* The chimera won't      |   |   |
|          | willingly disengage from a creature engaged with |   |   |
|          | it.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Graceful Icon                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Springing stag legs:* When the          |   |   |
|          | escalation die is odd, the chimera gains an      |   |   |
|          | additional standard action that turn.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Overly gracile:* The chimera's form is  |   |   |
|          | unusually frail, and any damage dice that roll   |   |   |
|          | 1s against the chimera count as 2s.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Leader Icon                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Mane of scorpion tails:* The chimera    |   |   |
|          | has a *fear aura*: Enemies engaged with the      |   |   |
|          | chimera who are below 48 hit points are dazed    |   |   |
|          | and can't use the escalation die.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Golden fleece:* The chimera has         |   |   |
|          | transformed itself into a form that's gem        |   |   |
|          | encrusted with golden fur. When slain it will    |   |   |
|          | yield 1d6 × 100 gp per adventurer in gems and    |   |   |
|          | precious metals. At the GM's say-so, knowledge   |   |   |
|          | of this bounty may grant particularly mercenary  |   |   |
|          | characters a +1 attack bonus against the chimera |   |   |
|          | once it's staggered.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Protector Icon                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Inferno belly:* When the chimera makes  |   |   |
|          | a *fiery breath* attack, it can make another     |   |   |
|          | *fiery breath* attack that turn as a quick       |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Flammable blood:* When the chimera      |   |   |
|          | rolls a natural odd miss with *fiery breath*, it |   |   |
|          | takes 20 fire damage.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Nature Icon                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Wild heart:* The chimera is constantly  |   |   |
|          | evolving and changing. When an enemy rolls a     |   |   |
|          | natural 1--5 on an attack roll against it, the   |   |   |
|          | chimera adds the escalation die to its attack    |   |   |
|          | rolls until the end of its next turn.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Vulnerability, poison:* The crit range  |   |   |
|          | of poison attacks against the chimera expands by |   |   |
|          | 2.                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Undead Icon                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Bone plates:* When an enemy rolls a     |   |   |
|          | natural even miss with a melee attack against    |   |   |
|          | the chimera, the weapon temporarily loses all    |   |   |
|          | its bonuses and powers and the wielder is        |   |   |
|          | weakened (save ends both).                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Vulnerability, holy:* The crit range of |   |   |
|          | holy attacks against the chimera expands by 2.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Brute Icon                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Mighty tusks:* As a standard action,    |   |   |
|          | the chimera can make a *tusk charge* attack. It  |   |   |
|          | can't make any other attacks the same turn.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Tusk charge +20 vs. AC**---100 damage          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | > *Limited use:* Once the chimera has damaged an |   |   |
|          | > enemy with this attack, it can't use *tusk     |   |   |
|          | > charge* again until it drops an enemy to 0 hp  |   |   |
|          | > or lower.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Too many horns:* The horns and tusks of |   |   |
|          | the chimera lock together at inopportune         |   |   |
|          | moments. When it rolls a natural 1--5 with an    |   |   |
|          | attack against multiple targets, it loses any    |   |   |
|          | further attacks that turn.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Religious Icon                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Eagle wings:* The chimera can fly like  |   |   |
|          | an eagle, swooping in and out of the battle.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Vulnerability, negative energy:* The    |   |   |
|          | crit range of negative energy attacks against    |   |   |
|          | the chimera expands by 2.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Trickster Icon                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Poison fangs:* When the chimera rolls a |   |   |
|          | natural 1--5 with an attack and misses, the      |   |   |
|          | target takes 20 ongoing poison damage.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Bickering heads:* The first time each   |   |   |
|          | turn the chimera hits with an attack, it rerolls |   |   |
|          | the attack and takes the lower roll.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Draconic Icon                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(B)** *Draconic sinews:* While not staggered,  |   |   |
|          | the chimera rolls 2d20 with its melee attacks    |   |   |
|          | and uses the higher roll.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **(F)** *Too many wings:* Whenever the chimera   |   |   |
|          | moves, it rolls an easy save (6+). On a failure, |   |   |
|          | it provokes opportunity attacks from each nearby |   |   |
|          | enemy.                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chimera

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Fangs, claws, and horns +14 vs. AC (3          | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---25 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 14--15:* The target is dazed until the  | * |   |
|          | end of the chimera's next turn from a headbutt.  |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Natural 16--17:* The target takes 20 ongoing    | * |   |
|          | damage from raking claws.                        | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *Natural 18--20:* The chimera makes a *fiery     | * | 0 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Fiery breath +14 vs. PD  | * |   |
|          | (up to 3 nearby enemies in a group)**---3d10     | * |   |
|          | fire damage                                      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Bestial thresher:* Whenever a creature misses   | * |   |
|          | the chimera with a melee attack, the chimera's   | * |   |
|          | multiple sharp bits deal 3d10 damage to that     |   |   |
|          | attacker.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Now it's angry:* When an attacker scores a      | * |   |
|          | critical hit against the chimera and it          | * |   |
|          | survives, its attack rolls on its next turn deal |   |   |
|          | the effects of the lower rolls as well as their  |   |   |
|          | own results.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Chuul

#### Chuulish Slave

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | **Misshapen claws +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Troop    | *Both attacks hit the same target:* The chuulish | * |   |
|          | slave can make a *writhing tentacles* attack     |   | 1 |
| Ab       | against that target as a quick action this turn. | * | 4 |
| erration |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Writhing tentacles +9 vs. PD**---The target is | P | 5 |
|          | weakened (save ends)                             | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Chuulish Slave Mutations: Choose                | * |   |
|          | ONE]{.underline}                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Chitinous plates:* The slave gains a +2 AC      | * |   |
|          | bonus.                                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Acid saliva:* The *writhing tentacles* attack   | * |   |
|          | also deals 10 acid damage on a hit.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Poisonous blood:* When a melee attack hits the  | * |   |
|          | chuulish slave, the attacker takes 10 poison     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Grossness:* The slave is a large blob-like      | * |   |
|          | mess. It has 72 HP but takes a --2 penalty to    | * |   |
|          | all defenses.                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chuul

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 6th    | **Crushing claws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---21   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | *Both attacks hit the same target:* The chuul    | * |   |
|          | grabs the target.                                |   | 1 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 8 |
| erration | **Crippling tentacles +11 vs. PD**---The target  | * |   |
|          | is weakened (save ends)                          | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *First failed save:* The target is hampered and  | * | 6 |
|          | weakened (save ends both).                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Second failed save:* The target is instead      | * |   |
|          | helpless (hard save ends, 16+).                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This attack only requires a quick   | D |   |
|          | action when used against an enemy the chuul is   | * |   |
|          | grabbing.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist psychic 16+:* When a psychic attack      | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | H |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Water-breathing:* Chuuls swim well and can      | * |   |
|          | breathe underwater, though they prefer not to.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bite it off:* When the chuul scores a critical  |   |   |
|          | hit against a weakened or helpless foe, it bites |   |   |
|          | off one of that enemy's hands. An adventurer     |   |   |
|          | with no hands might have trouble casting spells  |   |   |
|          | or holding weapons. (A cleric might be able to   |   |   |
|          | restore the missing appendage with a ritual.)    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fueled by hate:* Once per round when the chuul  |   |   |
|          | misses with an attack, its next attack that      |   |   |
|          | battle deals 4d6 extra poison damage on a hit.   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chuulish Swarm

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | **Fly-by tentacle sting +11 vs. AC**---15 poison  | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Troop     | *Natural even miss:* The swarm can pop free from  | * |   |
|           | all enemies, and as a quick action this turn, it  |   | 1 |
| A         | can move normally even if it has already moved    | * | 6 |
| berration | this turn.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The swarm can make a   | D | 0 |
|           | *sharp claws* attack this turn as a quick action  | * |   |
|           | instead of a standard action.                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Sharp claws +11 vs. AC**---10 damage, and 5     | * |   |
|           | ongoing poison damage                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Flight:* The swarm flies fast and is agile, but  | D |   |
|           | has a wide turning circle.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist damage 16+:* When any attack targets this |   |   |
|           | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+ on | * |   |
|           | the attack roll or it only deals half damage.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Swarm:* This monster is a swarm of chuul         | P |   |
|           | body-parts cooperating to attack humanoids. Even  | * |   |
|           | though there are thousands of them, treat them as | * |   |
|           | a single creature.                                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Water-breathing:* Chuuls swim well and can       |   |   |
|           | breathe underwater, though they prefer not to.    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Burrow under your skin:* When an attacker misses |   |   |
|           | the swarm with a melee attack, that enemy takes   |   |   |
|           | 10 ongoing damage.                                |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Massive Mutant Chuul

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 10th   | **Crushing claws +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---70   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | *Both attacks hit the same target:* The chuul    | * |   |
|          | grabs the target.                                |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 2 |
| erration | *Miss:* 35 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 4 |
|          | **Crippling tentacles +15 vs. PD**---The target  | D | 5 |
|          | is weakened (hard save ends, 16+)                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *First failed save:* The target is hampered and  |   |   |
|          | weakened (hard save ends both, 16+).             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Second failed save:* The target is instead      | M |   |
|          | helpless (hard save ends, 16+).                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This attack only requires a quick   | * |   |
|          | action when used against an enemy the chuul is   |   |   |
|          | grabbing.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *I hate you all:* Once per round when the chuul  | H |   |
|          | is engaged with one or more enemies and is the   | P |   |
|          | target of an attack, it can try to interpose one | * |   |
|          | of those enemies between itself and the attack   | * |   |
|          | as a free action after seeing the attack roll.   |   |   |
|          | That enemy rolls a normal save; on a failure, it |   |   |
|          | becomes the target of the attack instead of the  |   |   |
|          | chuul. If the chuul tries to interpose an enemy  |   |   |
|          | it's grabbing, the save is hard (16+) instead.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist psychic 16+:* When a psychic attack      |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Water-breathing:* Chuuls swim well and can      |   |   |
|          | breathe underwater, though they prefer not to.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Chuul Mutations: Choose ONE]{.underline}        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Exposed brain nightmare aura:* When an enemy is |   |   |
|          | engaged with the chuul at the start of its turn, |   |   |
|          | that creature must roll a normal save; on a      |   |   |
|          | failure, it's hampered (easy save ends, 6+).     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Extra claw:* The mutant chuul can make three    |   |   |
|          | *crushing claws* attacks instead of two. If two  |   |   |
|          | of the attacks hit the same target, the chuul    |   |   |
|          | grabs it.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Oversized claw:* When the chuul rolls a natural |   |   |
|          | even hit with *crushing claws*, it deals 120     |   |   |
|          | damage instead of 70.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Venom spit:* The chuul gains a *venom spit*     |   |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Venom spit +16 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or        |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---40 poison damage |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *First attack is a natural even roll:* The chuul |   |   |
|          | can make a second *venom spit* attack against    |   |   |
|          | the same group as a free action.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Whipping tentacles:* The *crippling tentacles*  |   |   |
|          | attack is now a close attack against 1d3 enemies |   |   |
|          | in a group.                                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Coin Zombie

#### Coin Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +2                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 2nd    | **Greedy claw +7 vs. AC**---3 damage             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **C: Lethal jackpot +7 vs. MD (1d3 nearby        | * | 2 |
| Mook     | enemies/bystanders)**---3 ongoing psychic        | * |   |
|          | damage, and if the target moves while taking     |   | 1 |
| Undead   | that damage, it can only move to the jangling    | * | 6 |
|          | pile of coins that fell out of the zombie's      | * |   |
|          | crumbling body to cause this attack              | P | 8 |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle per coin zombie mook,    | * |   |
|          | when that zombie drops to 0 hit points.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a coin zombie | * |   |
|          | cancels one mook's *lethal jackpot* ability that | * |   |
|          | turn, though if the crit eliminates more than    | M |   |
|          | one coin zombie, others will still trigger their | D |   |
|          | own lethal jackpots.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [*Nicer* Special for any coin or jackpot         |   |   |
|          | zombie]{.underline}                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | If you're feeling merciful, say that a PC can    | H |   |
|          | use a quick action to pocket some of the coins   | P |   |
|          | and grants a +2 bonus to the save against the    | * |   |
|          | ongoing psychic damage from the *lethal jackpot* | * |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackpot Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Greedy claw +10 vs. AC**---10 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **C: Lethal jackpot +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby       | * | 5 |
| Mook     | enemies/bystanders)**---10 ongoing psychic       | * |   |
|          | damage, and if the target moves while taking     |   | 1 |
| Undead   | that damage, it can only move to the jangling    | * | 9 |
|          | pile of coins that fell out of the zombie's      | * |   |
|          | crumbling body to cause this attack              | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle per jackpot zombie mook, | * |   |
|          | when that zombie drops to 0 hit points.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a jackpot     | * |   |
|          | zombie cancels one mook's *lethal jackpot*       | * |   |
|          | ability that turn, though if the crit eliminates | M |   |
|          | more than one coin zombie, others will still     | D |   |
|          | trigger their own lethal jackpots.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Coin Collector Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Grubby claw +11 vs. AC**---18 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **C: Lethal payout +11 vs. MD (1d3 + 1 nearby    | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | enemies/bystanders)**---10 ongoing psychic       | * |   |
|          | damage, and if the target moves while taking     |   | 2 |
| Undead   | that damage, it can only move to the jangling    | * | 0 |
|          | coins that dropped out of the zombie to cause    | * |   |
|          | this attack                                      | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 1 |
|          | *Limited use:* Free action when hit by a natural | * | 0 |
|          | even attack against AC, and when this zombie     | * |   |
|          | drops to 0 hit points.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Coin eater:* A coin collector zombie that       | * |   |
|          | spends its standard action stuffing coins into   | M |   |
|          | its mouth (or directly into its gut if there's a | D |   |
|          | convenient hole) heals 3d6 hit points. It        | * |   |
|          | normally doesn't spend its time this way in      | * |   |
|          | combat, but who can predict collectors?          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Headshot:* A critical hit against the coin      | * |   |
|          | collector zombie cancels its lethal payout       | H |   |
|          | attack.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Couatl

In addition to their standard abilities, all elder couatls and some
8th level couatls have another ability or attack---sometimes even
two---that flows from the power of the icon or icons they are presently
associated with. Memory keeper couatls who are associated with icons
that no longer exist should be given whichever ability or attack that
seems right. Alternatively, make up a new ability/attack that suits the
former icon you've created.

Here are some Icon-centered abilities:

+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Icon-centered Abilities                                               |
+=======================================================================+
| Magic Icon                                                            |
|                                                                       |
| *8th level*                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Striking comets +13 vs. PD (each nearby creature)**---40 damage  |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural even miss:* The target is dazed (save ends).                 |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural odd miss:* 20 damage.                                        |
|                                                                       |
| *Limited use:* 1/battle, when the escalation die is 2+.               |
|                                                                       |
| *11th level*                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Comet strike +17 vs. PD (each nearby creature)**---70 damage     |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural even miss:* The target is weakened (save ends).              |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural odd miss:* 35 damage.                                        |
|                                                                       |
| *Limited use:* 1/battle, when the escalation die is 2+.               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Zealous Icon                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +1 bonus to AC and PD. In addition, all the        |
| couatl's melee attacks deal half damage when they miss.               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Demonic Icon                                                          |
|                                                                       |
| Roll a d6 and a d8 on the Demon Ability table. If you get the same    |
| result, reroll the d8 until you have two *different* demonic          |
| abilities for the couatl.                                             |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Underground Icon                                                      |
|                                                                       |
| Secretly roll a d6 at the start of each battle. If the roll is odd,   |
| the PCs can't use any of their magic items' powers when the           |
| escalation die is odd this battle. If the roll is even, the PCs can't |
| use their magic items' powers when the escalation die is even this    |
| battle. Default chakra bonuses still function, but powers don't. And  |
| for the fun of it, once they've been powered off for a turn, all the  |
| PCs' magic items will be freaking out and creating roleplaying havoc  |
| by forcing their quirks to the forefront for the rest of the battle.  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Graceful Icon                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| At the start of each battle, the couatl gains 1d4 powers of its       |
| choice from this list:                                                |
|                                                                       |
| *Cruel:* Once per battle, deal ongoing damage to a target you hit     |
| with a natural even attack roll as a free action. The ongoing damage  |
| equals 5 times your level. As usual, a normal save (11+) ends the     |
| damage. A critical hit doesn't double this ongoing damage.            |
|                                                                       |
| *Highblood Teleport:* Once per battle as a move action, place         |
| yourself in a nearby location you can see.                            |
|                                                                       |
| *Elven Grace:* At the start of each of your turns, roll a die to see  |
| if you get an extra standard action. If your roll is equal to or      |
| lower than the escalation die, you get an extra standard action that  |
| turn. At the start of battle, you roll a d6. Each time you            |
| successfully gain an extra action, the size of the die you roll       |
| increases by one step on the following progression: (d4), d6, d8,     |
| d10, d12, d20. If you get an extra action after rolling a d20, you    |
| can't get any more extra actions that battle.                         |
|                                                                       |
| *Surprising:* Once per battle, subtract one from the natural result   |
| of one of your own d20 rolls.                                         |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Leader Icon                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +4 bonus to MD. It also gains a +2 bonus to        |
| attacks and to all defenses against each PC who has one or more icon  |
| relationship points with the Undead or Brute Icons.                   |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Protector Icon                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +1 bonus to attacks and to all defenses against    |
| each PC who has one or more icon relationship points with the Demonic |
| or Draconic Icons. In addition, the couatl can use the following      |
| attack once per battle.                                               |
|                                                                       |
| *8th level*                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Golden dragon breath +13 vs. PD (2d4 nearby enemies)**---50 fire |
| damage                                                                |
|                                                                       |
| *Miss:* Half damage.                                                  |
|                                                                       |
| *11th level*                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Golden dragon breath +17 vs. PD (2d4 nearby enemies)**---90 fire |
| damage                                                                |
|                                                                       |
| *Miss:* Half damage.                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Nature Icon                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +2 bonus to attacks and to all defenses against    |
| each PC who has one or more icon relationship points with the Magic   |
| or Leader Icons. In addition, the couatl regenerates 10% of its       |
| maximum hit points at the start of its turn when the escalation die   |
| is even and it has taken damage.                                      |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Undead Icon                                                           |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +2 bonus to attacks and to all defenses against    |
| each PC who has one or more icon relationship points with the Leader  |
| Icon. In addition, all PCs take a --4 penalty to death saves this     |
| battle.                                                               |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Brute Icon                                                            |
|                                                                       |
| The couatl gains a +4 bonus to PD. It also gains a +2 bonus to        |
| attacks and to all defenses against each PC who has one or more icon  |
| relationship points with the Underground or Graceful Icons.           |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Religious Icon                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| *8th level*                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Visions of a higher plane +13 vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---30 |
| psychic damage                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural even hit:* The target is confused (save ends).               |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural odd hit:* The target treats the escalation die as if it was  |
| 0 (not in effect) for its attacks and effects (save ends).            |
|                                                                       |
| *11th level*                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Visions of a higher plane +17 vs. MD (1d4 nearby enemies)**---50 |
| psychic damage                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural even hit:* The target is confused (save ends).               |
|                                                                       |
| *Natural odd hit:* The target treats the escalation die as if it was  |
| 0 (not in effect) for its attacks and effects (save ends).            |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+
| Draconic Icon                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| *Intermittent dragon breath:* A couatl can use *dragon breath* 1d3    |
| times per battle, but never two turns in a row. The couatl's personal |
| relationship with a Draconic Icon determines whether the damage is    |
| acid, fire, or lightning.                                             |
|                                                                       |
| *8th level*                                                         |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Dragon breath +13 vs. PD (2d3 nearby enemies)**---36 \[energy\]  |
| damage                                                                |
|                                                                       |
| *Miss:* Half damage.                                                  |
|                                                                       |
| *11th level*                                                        |
|                                                                       |
| **C: Dragon breath +17 vs. PD (2d3 nearby enemies)**---70 \[energy\]  |
| damage                                                                |
|                                                                       |
| *Miss:* Half damage.                                                  |
+-----------------------------------------------------------------------+

#### Couatl

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Rippling scales +13 vs. PD (each enemy engaged | A |   |
| level    | with it)**---10 damage, and the couatl must pop  | C | 2 |
|          | free from the target                             | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This attack only requires a quick   |   | 2 |
| Beast    | action (once per round) to use.                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Serpent strike +13 vs. AC (one dazed,          | P | 3 |
|          | confused, staggered, or stunned enemy)**---60    | D | 0 |
|          | damage, and 20 ongoing poison damage             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Forked devastation +13 vs. PD (one nearby   |   |   |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---50 damage of the following | * |   |
|          | type (couatl's choice): fire, holy, or lightning | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The couatl can make  | D |   |
|          | a *forked devastation* attack against a          | * |   |
|          | different enemy as a free action.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist holy and poison 16+:* When a holy or     | * |   |
|          | poison attack targets this creature, the         | * |   |
|          | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack   | H |   |
|          | roll or it only deals half damage.               | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* Couatls fly and hover so smoothly on   | * |   |
|          | their multi-colored wings that other flyers get  |   |   |
|          | jealous.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Cyclic escalator:* When the escalation die is   |   |   |
|          | even, the couatl adds the escalation die to its  |   |   |
|          | attack rolls.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ever-rippling:* The couatl can use more than    |   |   |
|          | one *rippling scales* attack during its turn.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flee:* Once per campaign, the couatl can take a |   |   |
|          | "campaign loss" similar to the PC-oriented flee  |   |   |
|          | special action to escape from certain death,     |   |   |
|          | along with its allies.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *One or two icon-centric abilities:* Choose each |   |   |
|          | appropriate ability from the couatl's            |   |   |
|          | Icon-centered Abilities list.                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Couatl

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 11th   | **Rippling scales +17 vs. PD (each enemy engaged | A |   |
| level    | with it)**---25 damage, and the couatl must pop  | C | 2 |
|          | free from the target                             | * | 4 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This attack only requires a quick   |   | 2 |
| Beast    | action (once per round) to use.                  | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Serpent strike +17 vs. AC (one dazed,          | P | 6 |
|          | confused, staggered, or stunned enemy)**---110   | D | 0 |
|          | damage, and 40 ongoing poison damage             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Forked devastation +17 vs. PD (one nearby   |   |   |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---90 damage of the following | * |   |
|          | type (couatl's choice): fire, holy, or lightning | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The couatl can make  | D |   |
|          | a *forked devastation* attack against a          | * |   |
|          | different enemy as a free action.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Cyclic salvation escalator:* When the           | * |   |
|          | escalation die is even, the couatl adds the      | * |   |
|          | escalation die to its attack rolls and saves.    | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Flight:* Couatls fly and hover so smoothly on   | * |   |
|          | their multi-colored wings that other flyers get  | * |   |
|          | jealous.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *One or two icon-centric abilities:* Choose each |   |   |
|          | appropriate ability from the couatl's            |   |   |
|          | Icon-centered Abilities list.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist holy and poison 16+:* When a holy or     |   |   |
|          | poison attack targets this creature, the         |   |   |
|          | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack   |   |   |
|          | roll or it only deals half damage.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ever-rippling:* The couatl can use more than    |   |   |
|          | one *rippling scales* attack during its turn.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flee:* Once per campaign, the couatl can take a |   |   |
|          | "campaign loss" similar to the PC-oriented flee  |   |   |
|          | special action to escape from certain death,     |   |   |
|          | along with its allies.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Demon

Demons may or may not have a special demonic ability. Roll 1d10 for each
non-mook normal-sized demon. If you roll less than or equal to the
demon's level, it has a random ability. Large or huge (or double- or
triple-strength) demons automatically get one at least one random
ability.

When a demon has an ability, roll 1d6 or 1d8 (GM's choice) on the table
below to determine what it is.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d6   Demonic        Description
  or   Ability        
  d8                  
  ---- -------------- -------------------------------------------------------
  1    True seeing    The demon is immune to invisibility and ignores any
                      illusions.

  2    Resist fire    You'll see that the demon resists fire the first time
       18+            you use fire against it.

  3    Invisibility   The first time the demon is staggered each battle, it
                      becomes invisible until the end of its next turn.

  4    Resist energy  The demon\'s resistance to all energy types puts a
       12+            damper on enemy spellcasters, but at least the
                      resistance is only 12+.

  5    Fear aura      Enemies engaged with the demon who are below its fear
                      hit point threshold are dazed and can't use the
                      escalation die. See Fear.

  6    Teleport       1d3 times per battle, as a move action, the demon can
                      teleport anywhere it can see nearby.

  7    Demonic speed  The demon can take an extra action each turn while the
                      escalation die is 4+.

  8    Gate           Once per battle as a standard action, if the demon is
                      staggered, it can summon a single demon ally at least
                      two levels below its own level. The allied demon rolls
                      initiative and does not appear on the battlefield until
                      its turn starts.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Dretch

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Claws +8 vs. AC**---6 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature, enemies | * | 5 |
| Mook      | that have 15 hp or fewer are dazed (--4 attack)   | * |   |
|           | and do not add the escalation die to their        |   | 1 |
| Demon     | attacks.                                          | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Imp

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | **Festering claws +7 vs. AC**---3 damage, and 5   | A |   |
| level     | ongoing damage                                    | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| Spoiler   | **R: Blight jet +7 vs. PD**---7 damage, and the   | * |   |
|           | target is dazed (save ends)                       |   | 1 |
| Demon     |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *First natural 16+ each turn:* The imp can choose | * |   |
|           | one: the target is weakened instead of dazed; OR  | P | 4 |
|           | the imp can make a *blight jet* attack against a  | D | 0 |
|           | different target as a free action.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Curse aura:* Whenever a creature attacks the imp |   |   |
|           | and rolls a natural 1--5, that creature takes     | * |   |
|           | 1d10 psychic damage.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.        | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cambion Dirk

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Damned dirk +10 vs. AC**---7 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The cambion becomes   | * | 8 |
| Mook      | cloaked until it's hit by an attack against MD or | * |   |
|           | until it misses with a natural odd attack roll.   |   | 1 |
| Demon     |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | *Dark step:* While cloaked, the cambion dirk      | * |   |
|           | automatically succeeds on all disengage checks.   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Despoiler

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Horns and daggers +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---5   | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Caster    | *Natural 16+:* The despoiler can pop free from    | * |   |
|           | the target.                                       |   | 1 |
| Demon     |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | **R: Abyssal whispers +9 vs. MD (one nearby or    | * |   |
|           | faraway enemy)**---15 psychic damage, and the     | P | 5 |
|           | target is confused (save ends); OR the target can | D | 2 |
|           | choose to avoid the confusion effect by taking    | * |   |
|           | 6d6 psychic damage                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Sow discord +9 vs. MD (2 nearby enemies      | * |   |
|           | engaged with the same creature or with each       | * |   |
|           | other)**---One target makes an at-will melee      | M |   |
|           | attack against this power's other target          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/day, as a quick action.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cambion Sickle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Damned sickle +11 vs. AC**---17 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The cambion becomes   | * | 9 |
| Troop     | cloaked until it's hit by an attack against MD or | * |   |
|           | until it misses with a natural odd attack roll.   |   | 1 |
| Demon     |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           | **R: Ray of darkness +11 vs. MD**---10 negative   | * |   |
|           | energy damage                                     | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is confused until  | * |   |
|           | the end of its next turn, or if the cambion was   | * |   |
|           | cloaked when it attacked, the confusion is save   |   |   |
|           | ends.                                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Improved dark step:* While cloaked, the cambion  | M |   |
|           | sickle automatically succeeds on all disengage    | D |   |
|           | checks and gains a +2 bonus to all defenses       | * |   |
|           | against ranged attacks.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frenzy Demon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Claw +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---9 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Raging frenzy:* Whenever the frenzy demon misses | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | with a melee attack, it gains a +1 attack bonus   | * |   |
|           | and deals +1d4 damage until the end of the battle |   | 1 |
| Demon     | (maximum bonus +4, +4d4).                         | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bat Demon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | **Scrabbling claws +11 vs. AC**---10 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 3 damage.                                 | * | 9 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Bat demons are indifferent flyers,      |   | 1 |
| Demon     | better suited to gliding between stalactites and  | * | 6 |
|           | clinging to walls than to skillful flying.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Murder-pile:* At the start of each of the bat    | D | 2 |
|           | demon mob's turns, choose one random nearby       | * |   |
|           | conscious enemy. All bat demons in the battle     | * |   |
|           | attempt to attack that enemy this turn, moving to |   |   |
|           | it without disengaging and relying on their       | * |   |
|           | *shifty* ability to protect them. They keep       | * |   |
|           | attacking their target that turn even if it drops | M |   |
|           | to 0 hp or below.                                 | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shifty:* Bat demons gain a +5 AC bonus against   | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks. In addition, they have       |   |   |
|           | *resist damage 18+* against opportunity attacks   | * |   |
|           | (half damage if the natural attack roll isn't     | * |   |
|           | 18+).                                             | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cambion Katar

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Damned katar +12 vs. AC**---20 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The cambion becomes   | * | 9 |
| Wrecker   | cloaked until it's hit by an attack against MD or | * |   |
|           | until it misses with a natural odd attack roll.   |   | 1 |
| Demon     |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           | **Spiky headbutt +12 vs. AC**---8 damage, and 10  | * |   |
|           | ongoing poison damage                             | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | **R: Ray of darkness +12 vs. MD**---10 negative   | * |   |
|           | energy damage                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is confused until  | * |   |
|           | the end of its next turn, or if the cambion was   | * |   |
|           | cloaked when it attacked, the confusion is save   | M |   |
|           | ends.                                             | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Corruption aura:* When an enemy misses the       | * |   |
|           | cambion katar with a melee attack, it suffers one |   |   |
|           | of the following effects:                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* The attacker takes 5 poison  | H |   |
|           | damage.                                           | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* The cambion katar can make a  | * |   |
|           | *spiky headbutt* attack against the attacker as a |   |   |
|           | free action.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Superior dark step:* While cloaked, the cambion  |   |   |
|           | katar automatically succeeds on all disengage     |   |   |
|           | checks and gains a +2 bonus to all defenses       |   |   |
|           | against close and ranged attacks.                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Corpse Dybbuk

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Supernatural strength +11 vs. AC**---35 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is vulnerable to the   | * | 6 |
| Troop    | dybbuk's attacks until the end of the battle.    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Demon    | *Natural 18+:* The dybbuk gains a *fear* aura    | * | 0 |
|          | against the target (save ends) as the dybbuk     | * |   |
|          | warps its corpse-flesh into a horrifying form.   | P | 1 |
|          | While engaged with the dybbuk, if the scared     | D | 8 |
|          | target has 30 hp or fewer, it's dazed (--4       | * | 0 |
|          | attack) and does not add the escalation die to   | * |   |
|          | its attacks.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 3d6 damage.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Unholy aversion:* When an enemy makes a spell   | D |   |
|          | attack or magic weapon attack against the corpse | * |   |
|          | dybbuk that deals holy damage and rolls a        | * |   |
|          | natural 18+, the dybbuk leaves its host body.    |   |   |
|          | The body drops in place and the corpse dybbuk    | * |   |
|          | becomes an undamaged ethereal dybbuk (see that   | * |   |
|          | entry). If the escalation die is 3+, reset the   | H |   |
|          | escalation die to 2.                             | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Warp another's flesh:* Once per battle as a     | * |   |
|          | free action, the corpse dybbuk can grant a       |   |   |
|          | nearby ally a +2 bonus to attack and damage      |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle. The warped ally     |   |   |
|          | takes damage equal to its level each time it     |   |   |
|          | uses a standard action to attack. If this        |   |   |
|          | ability is expended, the dybbuk regains it when  |   |   |
|          | the escalation die reaches 4+.                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Parasitic Dybbuk

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Loathsome vomity smear +10 vs. PD**---40       | A |   |
| level    | poison damage                                    | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | *Miss:* 3d10 poison damage.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Demon    | **C: Unearthly glare +10 vs. MD (one nearby      | * | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---30 psychic damage                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* One special dybbuk   | D | 8 |
|          | ability triggers as a free action (see below).   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the dybbuk  |   |   |
|          | can change its host's form to that of another    | * |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       | * |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 25 skill   | M |   |
|          | check. When the dybbuk is driven out of the host | D |   |
|          | body, the body reverts to its original form.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Unholy aversion:* When an enemy makes a spell   |   |   |
|          | attack or magic weapon attack against the        | * |   |
|          | parasitic dybbuk that deals holy damage and      | * |   |
|          | rolls a natural 18+, the dybbuk leaves the host  | H |   |
|          | body. The body drops in place (unconscious) and  | P |   |
|          | the parasitic dybbuk becomes an undamaged        | * |   |
|          | ethereal dybbuk (see that entry). If the         | * |   |
|          | escalation die is 3+, reset the escalation die   |   |   |
|          | to 2.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wall-crawler:* A dybbuk can climb on ceilings   |   |   |
|          | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Special Dybbuk Abilities: Choose                |   |   |
|          | ONE]{.underline}                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Visage of innocence +11 vs. MD (one nearby  |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---The target can't attack the dybbuk    |   |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Horrific visage +11 vs. MD (1d3 nearby      |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---The target is weakened (save ends). |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Puppet strings +11 vs. MD**---The target is |   |   |
|          | confused (save ends).                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Scratching nails:* When the target is engaged   |   |   |
|          | with the dybbuk at the start of its turn, it     |   |   |
|          | takes 20 damage.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Warped flesh:* The dybbuk heals 30 hp.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Experienced possessor:* When the dybbuk rolls a |   |   |
|          | natural odd hit or miss with *unearthly glare*,  |   |   |
|          | one special dybbuk ability triggers.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* The dybbuk can hover 6 feet off the    |   |   |
|          | ground and make boneless flea-like leaps.        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Vrock (vulture demon)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Filth-covered claws +11 vs. AC (2               | A |   |
| level     | attacks)**---7 damage, and 5 ongoing poison       | C | 1 |
|           | damage                                            | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The vrock can make a *demonic |   | 1 |
| Demon     | screech* attack as a free action.                 | * | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Demonic screech +11    | P | 8 |
|           | vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---5 psychic damage, | D | 8 |
|           | and the target is vulnerable (*attacks vs. it     | * |   |
|           | have crit range expanded by 2*) until the end of  | * |   |
|           | the battle                                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Predation:* Creatures hit by the vrock's         | D |   |
|           | *demonic screech* attack that are already         | * |   |
|           | vulnerable are also hampered (save ends).         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ethereal Dybbuk

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 7th    | **R: Soul-suck +12 vs. MD (3 attacks, against    | A |   |
| level    | nearby or faraway enemies)**---38 negative       | C | 2 |
|          | energy damage                                    | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* If the dybbuk hits the same       |   | 2 |
| Demon    | target with its first two *soul-suck* attacks,   | * | 0 |
|          | it must make the third attack against a          | * |   |
|          | different target if it can (or loses the         | P | 2 |
|          | attack).                                         | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Fading:* When the escalation die is 2+, the     | * |   |
|          | dybbuk's *soul-suck* attack only deals 19        |   |   |
|          | damage, and when it's 4+, soul-suck only deals   | * |   |
|          | 10 damage. When the escalation die reaches 6,    | * |   |
|          | the dybbuk fades away at the end of the round. A | M |   |
|          | dybbuk that fades away undefeated is not gone    | D |   |
|          | forever and may return in a later adventure.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature,        |   |   |
|          | enemies that have 36 hp or fewer are dazed (--4  | * |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     | * |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Flight:* The dybbuk hovers eerily, roughly 6    | * |   |
|          | feet off the ground.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Otherworldly:* When a melee attack that doesn't |   |   |
|          | deal holy damage targets this creature, the      |   |   |
|          | attacker must roll a natural 18+ on the attack   |   |   |
|          | roll or it only deals half damage.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hezrou (toad demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Meaty, clawed hands +12 vs. AC (2              | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---28 damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Troop    | *Any hit:* The demon can grab the target if it   | * |   |
|          | isn't already grabbing a creature. The grabbed   |   | 2 |
| Demon    | foe can't move except to teleport, pop free, or  | * | 0 |
|          | attempt to disengage, and disengage attempts     | * |   |
|          | take a --5 penalty unless the creature hit the   | P | 2 |
|          | hezrou with an attack that turn.                 | D | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | The hezrou gains a +4 attack bonus against any   | * |   |
|          | enemy it is grabbing.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Demonic stench:* While engaged with this        | * |   |
|          | creature, enemies with 84 hp or fewer are dazed  | M |   |
|          | (--4 attack) and do not add the escalation die   | D |   |
|          | to their attacks.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Abyssal sergeant:* Lower-level non-mook demons  | * |   |
|          | nearby the hezrou deal damage equal to their     | H |   |
|          | level when they miss with an attack.             | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Stab this now:* The hezrou's allies gain a +4   | * |   |
|          | attack bonus against any creature it is          |   |   |
|          | grabbing.                                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cambion Hellblade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Damned hellblade +14 vs. AC**---40 damage      | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The cambion becomes  | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | cloaked until it's hit by an attack against MD   | * |   |
|          | or until it misses with a natural odd attack     |   | 2 |
| Demon    | roll.                                            | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | **Spiky headbutt +14 vs. AC**---10 damage, and   | * | 0 |
|          | 15 ongoing poison damage                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Ray of darkness +14 vs. MD**---20 negative  | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is confused until | D |   |
|          | the end of its next turn, or if the cambion was  | * |   |
|          | cloaked when it attacked, the confusion is save  | * |   |
|          | ends.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Cloaked in evil:* The cambion hellblade starts  | * |   |
|          | every battle cloaked. As a quick action, the     | H |   |
|          | hellblade can drop its cloaking to make a *spiky | P |   |
|          | headbutt* attack as a free action.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Corruption aura:* When an enemy misses the      |   |   |
|          | cambion hellblade with a melee attack, it        |   |   |
|          | suffers one of the following effects:            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* The attacker takes 15       |   |   |
|          | poison damage.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* The cambion hellblade can    |   |   |
|          | make a *spiky headbutt* attack against the       |   |   |
|          | attacker as a free action.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ultimate dark step:* While cloaked, the cambion |   |   |
|          | hellblade automatically succeeds on all          |   |   |
|          | disengage checks, gains a +2 bonus to all        |   |   |
|          | defenses against close and ranged attacks, and   |   |   |
|          | can drop its cloaking as a quick action to       |   |   |
|          | teleport to a nearby location it can see         |   |   |
|          | (instead of making an extra attack).             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Glabrezou (pincer demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 8th    | **Pincer +13 vs. AC**---45 damage                | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The demon can grab the       | * | 2 |
| Caster   | target as long as it isn't already grabbing a    | * |   |
|          | creature. The grabbed foe can't move except to   |   | 1 |
| Demon    | teleport, pop free, or attempt to disengage, and | * | 8 |
|          | disengage attempts take a --5 penalty unless the | * |   |
|          | creature hit the glabrezou with an attack that   | P | 3 |
|          | turn.                                            | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | The glabrezou gains a +4 attack bonus against    | * |   |
|          | any enemy it is grabbing.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Painbolt +13 vs. MD (one nearby or faraway  | * |   |
|          | creature)**---70 psychic damage                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **C: Hellfire +13 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies in  | * |   |
|          | a group *and* any glabrezou allies engaged with  | * |   |
|          | those enemies)**---50 fire damage                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Mirror images:* At will, as a move action, a    | * |   |
|          | glabrezou can create multiple images of itself   | H |   |
|          | that make it harder to target. The next time an  | P |   |
|          | attack would hit the glabrezou, the attacker has | * |   |
|          | to roll 11+ with another d20 roll: success       | * |   |
|          | indicates a hit; failure is a miss that hits one |   |   |
|          | of the mirror images instead, dealing no miss    |   |   |
|          | damage to the glabrezou but dispelling all the   |   |   |
|          | images.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Once the glabrezou is staggered, it takes 2d10   |   |   |
|          | damage whenever it uses mirror image, so         |   |   |
|          | movement or escape start registering as          |   |   |
|          | alternatives.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power word stun:* Once per day as a free        |   |   |
|          | action, the glabrezou can utter a word of power, |   |   |
|          | canceling a single action just taken by a nearby |   |   |
|          | creature with fewer hit points than the          |   |   |
|          | glabrezou---whether it was casting a spell,      |   |   |
|          | healing an ally, or whatever. The GM can see the |   |   |
|          | results of the action, such as a die roll,       |   |   |
|          | before deciding whether to use the power word.   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Despoiler Mage

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Horns and swords +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---20 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Caster   | *Natural 16+:* The despoiler mage can pop free   | * |   |
|          | from the target.                                 |   | 2 |
| Demon    |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | **R: Abyssal whispers +14 vs. MD (one nearby or  | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---45 psychic damage, and the    | P | 1 |
|          | target is confused (save ends); OR the target    | D | 7 |
|          | can choose to avoid the confusion effect by      | * | 0 |
|          | taking 10d10 psychic damage                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Magic missile (one nearby or faraway        | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---10 automatic force damage             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action.       | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Sow discord +14 vs. MD (2 nearby enemies    | * |   |
|          | engaged with the same creature or with each      |   |   |
|          | other)**---one target makes an at-will melee     | * |   |
|          | attack against this power's other target         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as quick action.        | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aura of betrayal:* At the start of each of the  | * |   |
|          | despoiler mage's turns, choose a random nearby   |   |   |
|          | enemy. Until the start of the despoiler mage's   |   |   |
|          | next turn, that creature's allies no longer      |   |   |
|          | consider it an ally, though its enemies' powers  |   |   |
|          | can still target it as an enemy. The creature    |   |   |
|          | isn't compelled to attack its former friends.    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Vrock (vulture demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Giant filth-covered claws +14 vs. AC (2        | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---30 damage, and 15 ongoing poison    | C | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The vrock can make a         |   | 2 |
| Demon    | *demonic screech* attack as a free action.       | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Demonic screech +14   | P | 3 |
|          | vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---15 psychic       | D | 3 |
|          | damage, and the target is vulnerable (*attacks   | * | 3 |
|          | vs. it have crit range expanded by 2*) until the | * |   |
|          | end of the battle                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Sporeburst +14 vs. PD (all nearby           | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---30 damage, and 30 ongoing damage;   | M |   |
|          | while the target is taking ongoing damage, it is | D |   |
|          | hampered                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, when the escalation die |   |   |
|          | is 4+.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Predation:* Creatures hit by the vrock's        | H |   |
|          | *demonic screech* attack that are already        | P |   |
|          | vulnerable are also hampered (save ends).        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hooked Demon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 9th     | **Hooks and barbs +14 vs. AC**---27 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The hooked demon can make another  | * | 1 |
| Mook      | hooks and barbs attack as a free action (this can | * |   |
|           | keep going up to a maximum number of attacks      |   | 1 |
| Demon     | equal to the escalation die + 1).                 | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           | *Bleeding wounds:* Whenever the hooked demon hits | * |   |
|           | a creature with *hooks and barbs*, that creature  | * |   |
|           | takes 10 damage each time it makes a non-basic    |   |   |
|           | attack (save ends).                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Nalfeshnee (boar demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Musky claw or slimy hoof +15 vs. AC**---90     | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Caster   | *Miss:* The nalfeshnee gains a +4 attack bonus   | * |   |
|          | until it hits. Unlike most effects, let it       |   | 2 |
| Demon    | stack.                                           | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Accursed burst +15 vs. PD (1d3 nearby       | P | 4 |
|          | enemies)**---50 cold/fire/lightning/negative     | D | 0 |
|          | energy damage (your choice), and the nalfeshnee  | * | 0 |
|          | can make an *abyssal curse* attack as a free     | * |   |
|          | action                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Abyssal curse +15 vs. MD | * |   |
|          | (each creature hit by *accursed burst*)**---The  | M |   |
|          | target is weakened until the end of its next     | D |   |
|          | turn                                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Unpredictable:* Nalfeshnee always have at least | * |   |
|          | two random demon abilities.                      | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hooked mooks:* Once per battle, if the          |   |   |
|          | nalfeshnee is staggered, it can gate in 2d4      |   |   |
|          | hooked demons as a quick action. Roll initiative |   |   |
|          | for the hooked demons; they do not appear in the |   |   |
|          | battle and take their turns until their next     |   |   |
|          | initiative count comes up.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Marilith (serpent demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Six whirling swords +17 vs. AC (6              | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---30 damage, and the marilith can pop | C | 2 |
|          | free from the target after the attacks           | * | 1 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Beguiling gaze +17 vs. MD (one nearby or    |   | 2 |
| Demon    | faraway unengaged enemy)**---As a free action,   | * | 5 |
|          | the target immediately moves toward the          | * |   |
|          | marilith, attempting to engage it or get as      | P | 6 |
|          | close as possible to it                          | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Terrible swift swords:* The marilith's crit     | * |   |
|          | range with melee attacks expands by a number     | * |   |
|          | equal to the escalation die.                     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Balor (flame demon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 13th   | **Abyssal blade +18 vs. AC**---160 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The balor deals +1d20        | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | lightning damage to the target and to one other  | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy of the balor's choice. Then repeat  |   | 2 |
| Demon    | that damage roll against the targets once for    | * | 3 |
|          | each point on the escalation die (so if it's 4,  | * |   |
|          | that's four more d20 rolls).                     | P | 8 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 80 damage.                  | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Flaming whip +18 vs. PD (one nearby         |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---50 fire damage, and the target is     | * |   |
|          | pulled to the balor, who engages it              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 25 fire damage.             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Desperate escalator:* While staggered, the      | * |   |
|          | balor adds the escalation die to its attack      | * |   |
|          | rolls.                                           | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Fiery aura:* At the start of the balor's turn,  | * |   |
|          | each enemy engaged with it takes 4d10 fire       | * |   |
|          | damage; any die result of 10 is kept and the die |   |   |
|          | rerolled.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow and flame:* The balor gains a +5 bonus   |   |   |
|          | to all defenses against attacks by faraway       |   |   |
|          | enemies.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Vorpal blade:* Critical hits with the *abyssal  |   |   |
|          | blade* deal triple damage instead of double      |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Demon, Laughing

#### Cackling Demon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Jagged grin +11 vs. AC**---22 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Screams of laughter +11 vs. MD (1d3 nearby   | * | 6 |
| Leader    | enemies)**---14 psychic damage                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Demon     | *\[Once per battle special effect\] Natural even  | * | 0 |
|           | hit:* The target begins to laugh and laugh and    | * |   |
|           | laugh... laughing up 2d3 giggling demons and      | P | 9 |
|           | adding them to the fight. The newly arrived       | D | 0 |
|           | demons act immediately after the cackling demon   | * |   |
|           | that made the attack.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *\[Once per battle\] My what big teeth you have:* | * |   |
|           | As a quick action the cackling demon eats one or  | * |   |
|           | more mook demons of its own level or lower        | M |   |
|           | (consuming up to six), and either recharges its   | D |   |
|           | once per battle special for screams of laughter   | * |   |
|           | OR one nearby demon heals 1d20 hp per mook demon  | * |   |
|           | eaten.                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giggling Demon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling  | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 6th     | **Sharp little teeth +11 vs. AC**---6 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Pinned down:* These demons torment with their    | * | 3 |
| Mook      | tickling tails. Enemies that disengage from them  | * |   |
|           | suffer a cumulative --1 penalty on all checks and |   | 1 |
| Demon     | attacks until the end of the character's turn (no | * | 7 |
|           | maximum penalty).                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | *Weakling:* When building battles with this       | D | 1 |
|           | monster, it only counts a half a normal mook.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Invisibility:* Well, not invisibility pre-se,    | * |   |
|           | but more an ability to hide from sight until they | M |   |
|           | choose to reveal themselves. Outside of combat    | D |   |
|           | giggling demons can fold themselves up into very  | * |   |
|           | small spaces, slide under doors, even slip        | * |   |
|           | through cracks in floorboards. Of course, you can |   |   |
|           | still hear them giggling when you suffer a        | * |   |
|           | misfortune at their hands.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Laughing Demon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Tooth & claw and stomp +13 vs. AC**---30       | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Troop    | *Natural 18+:* One demon ally of the laughing    | * |   |
|          | demon can regain the use of a limited use        |   | 2 |
| Demon    | ability it has already expended this battle.     | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *Won't ... stop ... laughing:* While one or more | * | 0 |
|          | laughing demons are in a battle, deal psychic    | * |   |
|          | damage equal to twice the laughing demon's level |   |   |
|          | to each enemy who fails a save. Yes, that means  | * |   |
|          | death saves also. Nasty.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Demonic Icon Cult

#### Demonic Icon Fanatic

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Filed teeth +7 vs. AC**---5 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 2 ongoing    | * | 6 |
| Mook      | poison damage (normal save ends).                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **Strangling cord +7 vs. PD**---4 damage          | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* The target is stuck so long as | P | 1 |
|           | the Demonic Icon fanatic does not move or die     | D | 0 |
|           | (normal save ends), and the Demonic Icon          | * |   |
|           | fanatic's next *strangling cord* attack against   | * |   |
|           | the target gains a +2 bonus to attack and damage. |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Blowgun +7 vs. AC**---5 damage               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is dazed (normal   | D |   |
|           | save ends).                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Demonic Icon Priest

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Spectral dagger +8 vs. AC**---10 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* One nearby ally gains a +4     | * | 4 |
| Leader    | bonus to hit on its next attack.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **C: Liturgy of the Abyss +8 vs. MD (1d3 nearby   | * | 7 |
|           | enemies)**---12 damage                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* All nearby allies get a +1 AC | D | 5 |
|           | bonus (cumulative!) until the Demonic Icon priest | * |   |
|           | drops to 0 hit points.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Every use of *liturgy of the       | * |   |
|           | Abyss* reduces one random nearby Demonic Icon     | * |   |
|           | fanatic to 0 hp. If there are no Demonic Icon     | M |   |
|           | fanatics nearby, the Demonic Icon priest cannot   | D |   |
|           | use *liturgy of the Abyss*.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Kill the soul +8 vs. MD (one nearby          |   |   |
|           | enemy)**---10 damage. If an ally is engaged with  | * |   |
|           | the target, it can make a basic attack against    | * |   |
|           | the target as a free action                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *The Demonic Icon's mercy:* Once per battle as a  | * |   |
|           | standard action, the Demonic Icon priest can heal | * |   |
|           | a nearby ally or enemy for 40 hit points; the     |   |   |
|           | target also regains the use of one expended daily |   |   |
|           | or once-per-battle ability.                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | If the target of *the Demonic Icon's mercy* is a  |   |   |
|           | player character or other enemy, the target       |   |   |
|           | chooses whether to accept this mercy; if not, the |   |   |
|           | ability has no effect. A PC who accepts mercy and |   |   |
|           | who has a negative relationship with the Demonic  |   |   |
|           | Icon, it becomes conflicted; if the relationship  |   |   |
|           | is conflicted, it becomes positive. If the PC     |   |   |
|           | does not have an icon relationship with the       |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon, the character must shift one        |   |   |
|           | relationship point with another icon into a       |   |   |
|           | conflicted relationship with the Demonic Icon.    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Ye called in Their name, and I came hither:* As  |   |   |
|           | a standard action, a player character in the      |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon cult area (or some other evil marsh  |   |   |
|           | or cursed area!) who has a 5 or 6 icon advantage  |   |   |
|           | with the Demonic Icon can spend it to summon a    |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon priest to their location. The        |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon priest teleports next to the         |   |   |
|           | summoner, and acts on the turn immediately after  |   |   |
|           | the summoner's to perform *the Demonic Icon's     |   |   |
|           | mercy* on the summoner or a nearby ally. After    |   |   |
|           | doing so, it teleports away.                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Once per campaign for all Demonic  |   |   |
|           | Icon priests after the player characters' first   |   |   |
|           | battle against a Demonic Icon priest. And if used |   |   |
|           | on a character who already has a positive         |   |   |
|           | relationship with the Demonic Icon, the PC gets   |   |   |
|           | another such point, replacing one of their other  |   |   |
|           | icon relationships.                               |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Demonic Icon Wizard

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Half-hearted stab +8 vs. AC**---8 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Accursed bolt +9 vs. PD (one nearby or       | * | 4 |
| Caster    | faraway enemy)**---12 lightning damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even hit:* The Demonic Icon wizard can   | * | 8 |
|           | make an *accursed bolt* attack against a second   | * |   |
|           | nearby enemy, followed by a third and final       | P | 5 |
|           | different nearby enemy if the second attack is    | D | 4 |
|           | also a natural even hit.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The Demonic Icon wizard can    |   |   |
|           | make an *abyssal curse* attack as a free action.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Abyssal curse +9 vs. MD   | M |   |
|           | (creature hit by a natural odd *abyssal           | D |   |
|           | bolt*)**---The target is weakened until the end   | * |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **R: Hellfireball +9 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies   | * |   |
|           | in a group and any allies engaged with those      | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---18 fire damage                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* 7 psychic damage.              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/ battle, and generally after     |   |   |
|           | trying to corrupt at least one icon relationship. |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Corrupting grasp +9 vs. PD**---12 negative   |   |   |
|           | damage, and the target pops free.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* The target is dazed until the  |   |   |
|           | end of its next turn.                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *The Demonic Icon's knowledge:* Once per day, the |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon wizard can offer to answer           |   |   |
|           | truthfully one question about the adventure, with |   |   |
|           | knowledge drawn from the Demonic Icon or their    |   |   |
|           | spells rather than from the wizard. If the        |   |   |
|           | questioner has a negative relationship with the   |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon, it becomes conflicted; if the       |   |   |
|           | relationship is conflicted, it becomes positive.  |   |   |
|           | If the PC does not have an icon relationship with |   |   |
|           | the Demonic Icon, the character must shift one    |   |   |
|           | relationship point with another icon into a       |   |   |
|           | conflicted or positive relationship with the      |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon.                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *The Demonic Icon's blessing:* Once per battle as |   |   |
|           | a standard action, the Demonic Icon wizard can    |   |   |
|           | grant one nearby player character a random        |   |   |
|           | demon-style power from the table below. The       |   |   |
|           | blessing only takes effect if the character       |   |   |
|           | accepts it, but the character can choose to       |   |   |
|           | accept the blessing at any point this day, in     |   |   |
|           | this or another battle. If the blessing is        |   |   |
|           | accepted, *the Demonic Icon's blessing* affects   |   |   |
|           | the target's icon relationships the same as *the  |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon's knowledge*.                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Random Demon-Style Power (d4)**                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *1. Resist energy 16+*---When an attack that      |   |   |
|           | deals energy damage targets you, the attacker     |   |   |
|           | must roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it  |   |   |
|           | only deals half damage.                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *2. Fear aura*---Enemies engaged with you that    |   |   |
|           | have fewer hit points than double your current    |   |   |
|           | hit points are dazed. If they could normally use  |   |   |
|           | the escalation die, now they can't.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *3. Demonic speed*---You can take an extra        |   |   |
|           | standard action each turn that the escalation die |   |   |
|           | is even. You lose 2d6 hit points each time you    |   |   |
|           | use the extra action.                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *4. Teleport 1d3 + 1 times this battle*---As a    |   |   |
|           | move action, you can teleport anywhere you can    |   |   |
|           | see nearby.                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Ye called in Their name, and I came hither:* As  |   |   |
|           | a standard action, a player character in the      |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon cult area (or some other evil marsh  |   |   |
|           | or cursed area!) who has a 5 or 6 icon advantage  |   |   |
|           | with the Demonic Icon can spend it to summon a    |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon wizard to their location. The        |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon wizard teleports next to the         |   |   |
|           | summoner, and acts on the turn immediately after  |   |   |
|           | the summoner's to either answer a question with   |   |   |
|           | the Demonic Icon's knowledge or perform *the      |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon's blessing* on a nearby ally. After  |   |   |
|           | doing so, it teleports away.                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Once per campaign for all Demonic  |   |   |
|           | Icon wizards after the PC's first battle against  |   |   |
|           | a Demonic Icon wizard. If used on a character who |   |   |
|           | already has a positive relationship with the      |   |   |
|           | Demonic Icon, the PC gets another such point,     |   |   |
|           | replacing one of their other icon relationships.  |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Derro

Confusion effects only affect derro if they secretly want to murder one
of their own companions.

#### Derro Berserker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Scavenged weaponry +8 vs. AC**---8 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 5 ongoing damage. | * | 7 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Bad laughter:* While the derro berserker is      |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | staggered, it deals 4 extra damage when it hits   | * | 3 |
|           | with an attack.                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *What pain?:* The derro berserker ignores the     | D | 0 |
|           | first 6 points of damage it takes each turn.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Dead but still laughing:* When a derro berserker | * |   |
|           | drops to 0 hp, it doesn't die. Instead, it can    | M |   |
|           | take one final turn, and then it dies. Once the   | D |   |
|           | berserker drops, it can't be healed.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wrong head:* When an enemy targets the derro     |   |   |
|           | berserker with an attack against MD and gets a    | * |   |
|           | natural odd roll, that enemy is dazed until the   | * |   |
|           | end of its next turn. This effect occurs whether  | H |   |
|           | the attack hits or misses.                        | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fallen Derro

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Dirty fists and bites +8 vs. AC**---6 damage    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 3 ongoing damage. | * | 6 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Psychotic scream:* When a fallen derro dies, it  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | makes the following attack as a free action.      | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Psychotic scream +7 vs MD (each non-derro    | P | 9 |
|           | creature engaged with it)**---The target is dazed | D |   |
|           | until the end of its next turn                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural roll above target's Wisdom:* The target  |   |   |
|           | is confused until the end of its next turn        | * |   |
|           | instead of dazed.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Broken minds, broken bodies:* As a quick action, | * |   |
|           | a fallen derro can take 5 damage to end one       |   |   |
|           | ongoing effect on a creature in its mob.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Derro Maniac

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Shortsword +9 vs. AC**---12 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The derro can cast one of the      | * | 6 |
| Troop     | following close-quarters spells as a quick action | * |   |
|           | this turn.                                        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | *Cloaking dark:* All nearby derro gain a +1 bonus | * |   |
|           | to attacks and defenses until the end of the      | P | 5 |
|           | derro maniac's next turn (cumulative).            | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Sonic squeal:* Two random nearby non-derro       | * |   |
|           | creatures take 2d4 thunder damage.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Light repeating crossbow +9 vs. AC**---10    | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 5 ongoing    | * |   |
|           | poison damage.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 19+:* As above, and the derro maniac can | * |   |
|           | make another *light repeating crossbow* attack as | * |   |
|           | a free action.                                    | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Derro Sage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Staff +7 vs. AC**---7 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The derro can cast one of the      | * | 5 |
| Caster    | following close-quarters spells as a quick action | * |   |
|           | this turn.                                        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | *Cloaking dark:* All nearby derro gain a +1 bonus | * |   |
|           | to attacks and defenses until end of the derro    | P | 4 |
|           | sage's next turn (cumulative).                    | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Sonic squeal:* Two random nearby non-derro       | * |   |
|           | creatures take 2d8 thunder damage.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Mind scream +9 vs. MD**---12 psychic damage, | * |   |
|           | and the target is confused (*make a basic or      | M |   |
|           | at-will attack vs. ally*) until the end of the    | D |   |
|           | derro sage's next turn                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The derro sage can make another    |   |   |
|           | *mind scream* attack against a different nearby   | * |   |
|           | target as a free action.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group gibbering:* The derro sage starts a group  | * |   |
|           | of derro gibbering as a quick action. It can      |   |   |
|           | maintain the gibber as a free action at the start |   |   |
|           | of each turn by taking 1 damage. Each nearby      |   |   |
|           | non-derro creature that hears the gibber must     |   |   |
|           | roll a d6 at the start of its turn and takes      |   |   |
|           | psychic damage equal to the die roll or to the    |   |   |
|           | number of gibbering derro, whichever is lower.    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Derro Seer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Clubstaff +8 vs AC**---10 damage                | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Ripples of dark magic +9 vs. PD (1 nearby    | * | 4 |
| Leader    | enemy)**---12 force damage                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural 16+:* The target is teleported to a      | * | 9 |
|           | nearby location the seer can see. It can't be     | * |   |
|           | moved directly into dangerous terrain, over a     | P | 5 |
|           | cliff, etc.                                       | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 1--5:* The seer is dazed until the end   | * |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Not here but there:* As a quick action, the seer | * |   |
|           | can teleport a nearby ally it can see to any      | M |   |
|           | location that the seer can see.                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Prophecy of death:* As a quick action once per   | * |   |
|           | turn, the seer chooses an enemy it can see. The   |   |   |
|           | seer's non-mook allies gain a +2 attack bonus     | * |   |
|           | against that enemy. When an ally of the seer      | * |   |
|           | attacks that enemy and staggers it or drops it to | H |   |
|           | 0 hp or below, that ally heals 8 hp. The effect   | P |   |
|           | lasts until the start of the seer's next turn.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *I did not see that:* Once per battle, as an      |   |   |
|           | interrupt action when a critical hit is scored    |   |   |
|           | against the derro seer's ally, the seer can turn  |   |   |
|           | it into a normal hit instead.                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Not how it should be:* The first time each turn  |   |   |
|           | that the seer teleports an ally using *not here   |   |   |
|           | but there*, that ally heals 4 hp.                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Derro Whisperer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Obsidian blade +8 vs. AC**---8 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Cutting whisper +8 vs. MD**---14 psychic     | * | 4 |
| Archer    | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even miss:* The target's closest nearby  | * | 8 |
|           | ally takes 4 psychic damage.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck (save ends).   | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chaotic babble:* Enemies engaged with the derro  | * |   |
|           | whisperer take a --2 penalty to attack rolls and  |   |   |
|           | saving throws.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Psyche shift:* When an attacker targets the      | * |   |
|           | derro whisperer's MD and misses with a natural    | * |   |
|           | 1--5 attack roll, that enemy must reroll the      |   |   |
|           | attack against itself.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Silent shout:* When the escalation die is odd,   | H |   |
|           | *cutting whisper* targets 1d3 nearby enemies in a | P |   |
|           | group instead.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Devil

Although devils vary between campaigns, they need to retain certain key
elements. Devils:

-   Come from somewhere unearthly.

-   Embody evil.

-   Act through stealth, calculation, and guile.

-   Covertly interfere in mortal affairs.

-   Respect power and hierarchy---theirs, if no one else's.

-   Are clearly distinguishable from demons.

-   Have horns.

Devils have a unique ability called *devil's dues*. Player characters
that attack a devil don't automatically get to use the escalation die.
If you want to add the escalation die to your attack, you have to decide
before rolling the attack to give the devil its due. Each type of devil
(except for those with the *weakling* ability) will specify what it gets
when you give it its due. Note that an attack that targets more than one
devil would require multiple devil's due decisions and trade-offs.

Devils have other special abilities that can be picked randomly or
purposely. Choose 0 to 2 abilities per devil. Some abilities may be
conditional. For example, a devil may only get a special ability while a
boss devil is commanding them.

  --------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d10   Devil Ability Description
  ----- ------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  1     Alternative   Change the *resist fire 13+* ability to a different
        element       element, e.g. lightning or acid.

  2     Beast form    This rare special ability lets a devil pass unnoticed
                      through populated areas, though with a tell-tale sign
                      that it's preternatural, such as a big cat that looks
                      normal except for its forked tongue. Changing forms is
                      a move action.

  3     Devilish      The devil gains a +4 bonus to saves.
        resilience    

  4     Fear          The devil gains fear aura. Players with fewer hit
                      points than double the devil\'s current hit points are
                      dazed. They cannot use the escalation die.

  5     Final-gasp    When the devil drops to 0 hp, it stays up until its
        strike        turn, at which point it can take one last standard
                      action before dropping. The devil will drop without
                      getting that last action if it takes enough damage to
                      reduce its hit points to negative 25% of its starting
                      hp.

  6     Humanoid form This rare special ability lets the heroes meet a pit
                      fiend over dinner and not know it until too late.
                      Changing forms is usually a move action.

  7     Resist        The devil resists the effects (but not the damage) of
        non-damage    attacks with a natural attack roll of 12 or less.
        effects       Ongoing damage isn't affected by this ability. If the
                      attack deals energy damage that the devil is resistant
                      to (like fire), that damage is halved as normal. This
                      ability is tied to a devil's energy resistance number,
                      so if you increase that number for a devil with this
                      ability, the non-damage range also increases.

  8     Summon other  This ability is better used as a conditional feature
        devils        of a particular battle than as a standard special
                      ability. On the first round of battle, a group of
                      devils keens eerily, and everyone knows they're
                      summoning something, but no one knows exactly what, or
                      when it will show up.

  9     True seeing,  Powerful devils might have the ability to see through
        see invisible simple ruses and illusions.

  10    Unearthly     If a devil takes X damage or less, negate that damage.
        toughness     Bigger blows have full effect, but petty blows are
                      beneath the devil's notice. Set X at the devil's
                      level + 1. It will be immune to normal miss damage
                      from enemies that are its level or lower. Or set X at
                      5% of its starting hit points to have the value scale
                      up faster at higher levels.
  --------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Skin Devil

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling  | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Fleshy limb +7 vs. AC**---6 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Stay whole:* At the start of its turn, a skin    | * | 6 |
| Troop     | devil heals 8 hp. If it doesn't heal up to its    | * |   |
|           | maximum hit points, it loses its ability to heal  |   | 1 |
| Devil     | from this ability until the end of the battle.    | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Structural collapse:* While the skin devil is    | P | 2 |
|           | staggered, when an enemy damages it, it loses an  | D | 8 |
|           | additional 4 hp as the hapless thing fails to     | * |   |
|           | hold its boneless, bulky mass together.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Weakling:* When building battles using this      | * |   |
|           | monster, it only counts as half a normal monster. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Free-form covert ability---Unnoticed:* The skin  | D |   |
|           | devil is routinely able to pass through civilized | * |   |
|           | areas without alerting dogs, bouncers, city       | * |   |
|           | guards, or passersby. If the thing attacks,       |   |   |
|           | that's when you notice that it's not a human but  | * |   |
|           | a monstrous pile of flesh. In addition to passing | * |   |
|           | unnoticed in crowds, it uses its fluid shape to   | H |   |
|           | sneak through hidden places, and it doesn't make  | P |   |
|           | much noise unless it wants to. PCs looking for    | * |   |
|           | the devil won't find it unless they have some     | * |   |
|           | special information or advantage, and even then   |   |   |
|           | it's a ridiculously hard check (DC 25). Normally  |   |   |
|           | when PCs think they have the devil cornered, it   |   |   |
|           | escapes through a tight exit that it had          |   |   |
|           | previously identified.                            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lemure

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Heedless claws +8 vs. AC**---6 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Devil's due (Squirm):* When you choose to add    | * | 5 |
| Mook      | the escalation die to an attack against a lemure, | * |   |
|           | another lemure in the mob somehow ends up in an   |   | 1 |
| Devil     | unwanted place in the battle, though it's hard to | * | 7 |
|           | say how exactly. They don't seem to teleport, but | * |   |
|           | there are so many of the things squirming around  | P | 1 |
|           | it just happens.                                  | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Living wave:* When three or more lemures engage  | * |   |
|           | an enemy, they can pick it up and move it along   |   |   |
|           | with them as they please without taking           | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks. The enemy getting moved      | * |   |
|           | around pops free of any other enemies engaged     | M |   |
|           | with it.                                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Nobody home:* When a lemure is targeted by an    | * |   |
|           | attack against MD, it ignores any effects of the  |   |   |
|           | attack and only takes damage from it. In          | * |   |
|           | addition, lemures fight in a straightforward way, | * |   |
|           | without tactics. They never disengage willingly,  | H |   |
|           | and they're not coordinated enough to concentrate | P |   |
|           | attacks on a vulnerable target.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets     |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Free-form ability---Mass:* Heedless of each      |   |   |
|           | other's safety or their own, lemures use sheer    |   |   |
|           | numbers to press through locked doors, climb      |   |   |
|           | walls, or dog pile on defenders.                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Too dumb to die:* At the start of the lemure     |   |   |
|           | mob's turn, roll a d6 for each lemure in the mob  |   |   |
|           | that's dropped this battle. For each 6, one of    |   |   |
|           | them reassembles its horrid self and stumbles     |   |   |
|           | back into the melee that turn (add 13 hit points  |   |   |
|           | to the mob's hp total). To make sure a downed     |   |   |
|           | lemure is truly dead, an attacker can spend an    |   |   |
|           | additional 7 damage of the total dealt to finish  |   |   |
|           | the job instead of carrying that damage over to   |   |   |
|           | another lemure in the mob. Expending the right    |   |   |
|           | sort of limited-use power, such as a daily spell, |   |   |
|           | might also keep a number of downed lemures        |   |   |
|           | totally dead. Once the last member of the mob     |   |   |
|           | drops, stop rolling to see if lemures rise up.    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hell Imp

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Needling taunt +9 vs. MD**---8 psychic damage,  | A |   |
| level     | and the target is hampered until the end of its   | C | 1 |
|           | next turn                                         | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Stinging tail +9 vs.      |   | 1 |
| Devil     | PD**---8 ongoing poison damage and the target is  | * | 8 |
|           | weakened (save ends both)                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | *Limited use:* As a free action, when an enemy    | D | 0 |
|           | engaged with the hell imp misses it with an       | * |   |
|           | attack.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Devil's due (Mwhahahah!):* When you choose to    | * |   |
|           | add the escalation die to an attack against a     | * |   |
|           | hell imp, the imp automatically hits with its     | M |   |
|           | next *needling taunt* attack this battle, and the | D |   |
|           | target takes 2d6 extra psychic damage.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Hell imps are capable of impressive     |   |   |
|           | feats of aerial agility, but only when their      | * |   |
|           | lives depend on it.                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets     | P |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Vanish:* Once per battle as a move action, a     |   |   |
|           | hell imp can become invisible, pop free from all  |   |   |
|           | enemies engaged with it, move away somewhere      |   |   |
|           | nearby, and then reappear.                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Free-form ability---Provoke:* Hell imps are as   |   |   |
|           | capable as you might expect at handling social    |   |   |
|           | situations, sneaking, noticing spies, and the     |   |   |
|           | like. Their special talent is provocation. They   |   |   |
|           | can talk their associates into all sorts of       |   |   |
|           | extreme emotions and imprudent behavior.          |   |   |
|           | Likewise, they can probably goad PCs into losing  |   |   |
|           | their cool.                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Potent venom:* The *stinging tail* attack deals  |   |   |
|           | 3 extra ongoing poison damage (11 total), but the |   |   |
|           | target must succeed on two saves (one for ongoing |   |   |
|           | and one for weakened).                            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Honey Devil, aka Slime Devil

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling  | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Hidden dagger +9 vs. AC**---6 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *The target has MD 15 or lower:* The honey devil  | * | 7 |
| Troop     | can make a disengage check this turn as a free    | * |   |
|           | action.                                           |   | 1 |
| Devil     |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | *Desperate plea:* When the honey devil is         | * |   |
|           | staggered by an attack, it makes a *confusing     | P | 3 |
|           | plea* attack against the attacker as a free       | D | 5 |
|           | action after the attack.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Confusing plea +9 vs. MD**---The target is      |   |   |
|           | confused (save ends)                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Glamour of innocence:* This creature seems       | M |   |
|           | innocent, not someone a hero should hurt. At      | D |   |
|           | worst, it's ugly, but is that a crime? When an    | * |   |
|           | enemy rolls a natural odd attack roll against a   | * |   |
|           | honey devil, the attack misses and has no effect. |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | H |   |
|           | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | P |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Weakling:* When building battles using this      |   |   |
|           | monster, it only counts as half a normal monster. |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Free-form covert ability---Slimy:* In any        |   |   |
|           | non-combat struggles with a honey devil, it       |   |   |
|           | excels at being too slippery for the PCs, both    |   |   |
|           | personally and through its underground network of |   |   |
|           | minions. In an indirect contest, the PCs might    |   |   |
|           | try to talk sense to one of the devil's dupes or  |   |   |
|           | to discern suspicious activity while staking out  |   |   |
|           | the devil's secret network. The honey devil is an |   |   |
|           | expert at what it does, so use DC 25 for any such |   |   |
|           | skill checks. Assume that the devil is competent  |   |   |
|           | at slipping its influence through the network     |   |   |
|           | unnoticed. Failure might mean that the PC has     |   |   |
|           | succeeded in gaining information, which in turn   |   |   |
|           | sends them down a dead end or into a trap. In a   |   |   |
|           | direct confrontation, the devil is likewise hard  |   |   |
|           | to pin down, see through, or otherwise get the    |   |   |
|           | better of.                                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | A slime devil seems unremarkable and innocuous,   |   |   |
|           | so downplay its significance whenever describing  |   |   |
|           | it, especially when it has company. When mortals  |   |   |
|           | actually decide to attack or capture a honey      |   |   |
|           | devil, it's probably slippery enough to escape at |   |   |
|           | the last minute, maybe through a hidden exit.     |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Smoke Devil

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Dire embrace +10 vs. PD**---15 poison damage    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Full embrace:* If the target is the only         | * | 9 |
| Troop     | creature engaged with the smoke devil, the attack | * |   |
|           | deals 30 poison damage instead.                   |   | 1 |
| Devil     |                                                   | * | 9 |
|           | *Miss:* 7 poison damage.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Ember of hate:* Each time the smoke devil hits   | D | 0 |
|           | an enemy, the embers floating in the center of    | * |   |
|           | its body glow more brightly. Once per battle as a | * |   |
|           | free action during its turn, the devil can make   |   |   |
|           | an *ember burst* attack. It also makes this       | * |   |
|           | attack as an interrupt action when it drops to 0  | * |   |
|           | hp.                                               | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | **Ember burst +10 vs. PD (each enemy engaged with | * |   |
|           | the devil)**---The target takes 5 fire damage for | * |   |
|           | each creature hit by the smoke devil earlier in   |   |   |
|           | the battle (max 15 damage; remember to track      | * |   |
|           | this).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Devil's due (Formless):* When you choose to add  | P |   |
|           | the escalation die to an attack against a smoke   | * |   |
|           | devil, it gains *resist damage 16+* against the   | * |   |
|           | attack.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Smoke devils drift and eddy as if blown |   |   |
|           | by an evil wind.                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets     |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Free-form covert ability---Insinuate:* Smoke     |   |   |
|           | devils have a preternatural ability to get to     |   |   |
|           | their chosen victims. Keeping the smoke devil out |   |   |
|           | is a hard, champion-tier challenge (DC 25).       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Smokey retreat:* A smoke devil can "take 12" on  |   |   |
|           | disengage checks, taking a natural result of 12   |   |   |
|           | instead of rolling (which normally would allow it |   |   |
|           | to disengage automatically from up to two         |   |   |
|           | enemies).                                         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bearded Devil (Barbazu)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 6th    | **Wicked halberd +11 vs. AC**---30 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The bearded devil gains a +4      | * | 0 |
| Blocker  | bonus to all defenses until the start of its     | * |   |
|          | next turn.                                       |   | 2 |
| Devil    |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **Supernaturally filthy beard +11 vs. PD**---The | * |   |
|          | target is weakened until the end of its next     | P | 2 |
|          | turn (*--4 attacks and defenses*)                | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Bearded defense:* When an enemy engaged with    | * |   |
|          | the bearded devil misses it with an attack, the  |   |   |
|          | devil can make a *filthy beard* attack against   | * |   |
|          | that enemy as a free action.                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Solidity):* When you choose to add | D |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a        | * |   |
|          | bearded devil, the devil or one of its nearby    | * |   |
|          | allies can roll a save against a save ends       |   |   |
|          | effect.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Opportunistic beard:* When the bearded devil    | H |   |
|          | makes an opportunity attack, it can also make a  | P |   |
|          | *filthy beard* attack against the same target as | * |   |
|          | a free action.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Skilled interceptor:* A bearded devil can       |   |   |
|          | intercept an enemy while engaged with other      |   |   |
|          | enemies. As a free action, it can either make a  |   |   |
|          | disengage check to try to move to intercept the  |   |   |
|          | enemy, or move to intercept the enemy and only   |   |   |
|          | take half damage from opportunity attacks.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Toxic beard:* The target of the bearded devil's |   |   |
|          | *filthy beard* attack now takes 10 ongoing       |   |   |
|          | poison damage and is weakened (save ends both)   |   |   |
|          | instead.                                         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hooded Devil

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 7th     | **Crushing punch or kick +12 vs. AC**---18 damage | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* If this is the devil's first       | * | 2 |
| Troop     | attack during its turn, it can make a *telepathic | * |   |
|           | harry* attack as a free action.                   |   | 2 |
| Devil     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | **C: Telepathic harry +12 vs. MD (one nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---The target takes 30 psychic damage     | P | 9 |
|           | each time it makes a non-basic attack (save       | D | 0 |
|           | ends). The target silently hears a terribly       | * |   |
|           | hurtful statement, in the voice of the person who | * |   |
|           | would hurt them the most by saying it.            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* If this is the devil's first       | * |   |
|           | attack during its turn, it can make a *crushing   | M |   |
|           | punch or kick* attack as a free action.           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Devil's due (Mastery):* When you choose to add   | * |   |
|           | the escalation die to an attack against a hooded  |   |   |
|           | devil, it adds the escalation die to its attacks  | * |   |
|           | until the end of the battle and no other attacks  | * |   |
|           | against it can use the escalation die.            | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Restoration:* At the start of a hooded devil's   |   |   |
|           | turn, it can roll a save against each save ends   |   |   |
|           | effect affecting it if it doesn't attack that     |   |   |
|           | turn (so it could successfully save against       |   |   |
|           | confused or stunned conditions and still move     |   |   |
|           | that turn, for example.)                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Free-form covert ability---Master:* A hooded     |   |   |
|           | devil instinctively masters everything around it: |   |   |
|           | the furniture, terrain, conversations, and        |   |   |
|           | people. If the PCs attempt to overcome a hooded   |   |   |
|           | devil through skill checks, the check is DC 30.   |   |   |
|           | Good luck if you need to win an argument, get to  |   |   |
|           | an exit first, use terrain to your advantage, or  |   |   |
|           | pressure one of the devil's thugs to rat it out.  |   |   |
|           | The name of this ability is a verb.               |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fury Devil (Erinyes)

[Hellbent]{.underline}

Fury devils become hellbent against a creature for story reasons outside
the scope of a single battle. PCs could give devils ample reason to hate
them. Or a succession of 5s as relationship dice with icon interactions
that involve the devils might suffice to make the fury devil hellbent.
More often than not, it won't be one of the PCs who is the target, but
getting in the way of hellbent furies is a problem. They will try to
bypass defenders, however, to concentrate on killing their target or
targets.

Typically, a single fury devil leaves the Pit to exact retribution. If
heroes manage to beat that erinyes back, then three new fury devils rise
up to try to finish the mission that the first one failed at, and
whoever killed the first erinyes is on their hit list, too. If those
devils fail, five erinyes come next, with another hero added to their
list. If stout-hearted heroes defeat all five fury devils, they're safe.
Maybe.

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Stout, sharp dagger +13 vs. AC**---24 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Any hit while hellbent:* The target also takes  | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | 8 psychic damage and 8 ongoing psychic damage    | * |   |
|          | (that feels like a terminal case of guilt).      |   | 2 |
| Devil    |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *Miss while hellbent:* 4 psychic damage.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Word of rebuke +13 vs. MD**---15 psychic    | D | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Any hit while hellbent:* The target takes 30    |   |   |
|          | psychic damage instead.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Defense against the inconsequential:* Attacks   | M |   |
|          | against a fury devil take a --4 penalty unless   | D |   |
|          | the devil is hellbent against that attacker.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Fury):* When you choose to add the |   |   |
|          | escalation die to an attack against a fury       | * |   |
|          | devil, the fury devil deals 1d10 extra damage    | * |   |
|          | with its next attack this battle, hit or miss.   | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Flight:* Fury devils fly from place to place    | * |   |
|          | but fight on their feet.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Menacing charge:* When an enemy intercepts the  |   |   |
|          | fury devil, the next attack this battle the      |   |   |
|          | devil makes against that enemy that hits is a    |   |   |
|          | critical hit instead.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bone Devil (Osyluth)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 9th    | **Bone claw +14 vs. AC**---80 damage, and the    | A |   |
| level    | bone devil can make a *doom venom sting* attack  | C | 2 |
|          | as a free action.                                | * | 3 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Doom venom sting +14 vs. PD**---20 damage, and |   | 2 |
| Devil    | the target can't use recoveries, even            | * | 3 |
|          | involuntarily (save ends)                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **R: Bone javelin +14 vs. AC**---50 damage       | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Devil's due (Free!):* When you choose to add    | * |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a bone   |   |   |
|          | devil, one bone devil in the battle can teleport | * |   |
|          | to a nearby location it can see as a move action | * |   |
|          | once later this battle. Multiple attacks         | M |   |
|          | accumulate into multiple possible move action    | D |   |
|          | teleports for any bone devils in the battle.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Mana venom:* The devil's *doom venom sting*     |   |   |
|          | attack also negates one spell effect created by  |   |   |
|          | the target until the target is able to use       |   |   |
|          | recoveries again. (The effect isn't canceled,    |   |   |
|          | only suppressed until the target saves.)         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Barbed Devil (Hamatula)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 10th   | **Glistening claws +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---12 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Caster   | *Natural 16+:* The barbed devil can make a       | * |   |
|          | *whirling barbs* attack as a free action.        |   | 2 |
| Devil    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Miss:* 6 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Whirling barbs +15 vs.   | D | 7 |
|          | PD**---9 damage                                  | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Ball of hellfire +15 vs. PD (1d3 nearby     |   |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---30 fire damage           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 20 poison   | M |   |
|          | damage and is hampered until the end of its next | D |   |
|          | turn as it chokes on sulphurous fumes.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Barbs everywhere:* When an enemy engages the    |   |   |
|          | devil, the barbed devil can make a *whirling     | * |   |
|          | barbs* attack against it as a free action.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Loot):* When you choose to add the | P |   |
|          | escalation die to an attack against a barbed     | * |   |
|          | devil, you must expend one of your unused true   | * |   |
|          | magic item powers as the item gets a close       |   |   |
|          | encounter with the barbed devil's "soul". If you |   |   |
|          | can't expend such a power, no escalation die for |   |   |
|          | you.                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Slashing dodge:* While engaged with a single    |   |   |
|          | enemy, the barbed devil can "take 11" on a       |   |   |
|          | disengage check, taking a natural result of 11   |   |   |
|          | instead of rolling. When it does so and          |   |   |
|          | successfully disengages, it can make a *whirling |   |   |
|          | barbs* attack against that enemy as part of the  |   |   |
|          | move action.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ice Devil (Gelugon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | **Wicked glaive +16 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Leader   | *Natural even hit:* As a free action, one of the | * |   |
|          | ice devil's nearby allies of its level or lower  |   | 2 |
| Devil    | can make a basic attack as the ice devil sets    | * | 4 |
|          | the battlefield. That attack only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target is stuck (save     | * | 0 |
|          | ends).                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Rime):* When you choose to add the | M |   |
|          | escalation die to an attack against an ice       | D |   |
|          | devil, you are stuck (save ends).                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shattering counsel:* When a lower level nearby  |   |   |
|          | ally of the ice devil attacks a creature that's  | * |   |
|          | stuck, the crit range of that attack expands by  | * |   |
|          | the escalation die.                              | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Resist cold 13+:* When a cold attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Horned Devil (Cornugon)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Barbed fork +17 vs. AC**---150 damage, and     | A |   |
| level    | until the end of the battle against the target,  | C | 2 |
|          | the devil gains a +1 bonus to attacks and its    | * | 6 |
| Troop    | crit range expands by 1 (cumulative)             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Devil    | *Natural even hit:* The horned devil can make a  | * | 6 |
|          | *slicing tail* attack against a different target | * |   |
|          | as a free action.                                | P | 7 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural even miss:* The horned devil can make a | * | 0 |
|          | *slicing tail* attack as a free action.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Slicing tail +17 vs. PD**---35 ongoing damage  | * |   |
|          | from a bleeding wound                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **R: Flaming dart +17 vs. AC**---60 damage, and  | D |   |
|          | 30 fire damage                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 30 ongoing  |   |   |
|          | fire damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Weakness):* When you choose to add | H |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a horned | P |   |
|          | devil, you are weakened until the end of your    | * |   |
|          | next turn after you make the attack.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Horned devils are clumsy but           |   |   |
|          | determined fliers.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Pit Fiend

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +19                                  | * | 29 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 14th   | **Fiendish weapon +19 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---140 | A | 27 |
| level    | damage, and until the end of the battle the      | C |    |
|          | target takes a --2 penalty to attacks, defenses, | * | 27 |
| Wrecker  | and level-based d20 rolls. Hit points, feats,    | * |    |
|          | weapon damage, and other level-based benefits    |   | 16 |
| Devil    | don't change. (The penalty isn't cumulative.)    | * | 00 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The pit fiend can make an         | P |    |
|          | *entangling tail* attack against a different     | D |    |
|          | target as a free action.                         | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Both attacks hit:* The pit fiend can use        |   |    |
|          | *fiendish vigor* as a free action.               | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **Entangling tail +19 vs. PD**---40 damage, and  | M |    |
|          | the target is hampered until the end of its next | D |    |
|          | turn or until the pit fiend makes another        | * |    |
|          | *entangling tail* attack.                        | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **R: Burst of hellfire +19 vs. PD (up to 3       | * |    |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---120    | * |    |
|          | fire damage                                      | H |    |
|          |                                                  | P |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **C: Black utterance of denial +19 vs. MD (each  |   |    |
|          | enemy engaged with the pit fiend)**---The target |   |    |
|          | is hampered until the end of its next turn       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Devil's due (Menace):* When you choose to add   |   |    |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a pit    |   |    |
|          | fiend, the escalation die does not increase at   |   |    |
|          | the start of the next round. Special             |   |    |
|          | circumstances and PC powers can still increase   |   |    |
|          | it.                                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Fiendish vigor:* As a standard action, the pit  |   |    |
|          | fiend can heal 300 hp and roll a save against    |   |    |
|          | each ongoing effect on it. It can use *fiendish  |   |    |
|          | vigor* up to five times per battle.              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Flight:* Amidst wind and flames, a pit fiend    |   |    |
|          | can fly with surprising agility.                 |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |    |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Cloak of fire:* When a creature is engaged with |   |    |
|          | the pit fiend at the start of its turn, that     |   |    |
|          | creature takes 20 fire damage.                   |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Devil, Fang

Fang Devil is a singular river creature. The first time the heroes
encounter the devil, it should be a 7th level monster. If the PCs slay
the devil near water, you may foreshadow that the devil will be back as
a multiplicity of 10th level river devils. In 13th Age, threats
don't necessarily die the first time you deal with them. In the case of
Fang Devil, it's a localized threat within one river at a time at 7th
level. When it becomes a multiplying group of 10th level creatures, it
could spread out wherever the campaign requires it.

#### Fang Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Mighty tentacles +12 vs. PD (2 attacks; can    | A |   |
| level    | target nearby enemies)**---20 damage             | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from    | * |   |
|          | each enemy and moves next to the Devil, which    |   | 2 |
| Devil    | engages and grabs it. (The Devil can grab any    | * | 2 |
|          | number of enemies simultaneously.) If it has     | * |   |
|          | quick actions left, it will use its *devil's     | P | 3 |
|          | beak* and *cutting talon* attacks.               | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Cutting talon +12 (+16 against a grabbed       | * |   |
|          | enemy) vs. AC**---40 damage                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 20     | D |   |
|          | ongoing damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 20 ongoing damage.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  | * |   |
|          | action (once per round) to use.                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Devil's beak +16 vs. AC  | * |   |
|          | (one enemy it's grabbing; includes +4 grab       | * |   |
|          | bonus)**---30 damage                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  |   |   |
|          | action (once per round) to use.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Trouble):* When you choose to add  |   |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against Fang     |   |   |
|          | Devil, you are hampered until the end of your    |   |   |
|          | next turn after you make the attack.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist energy 13+:* When an energy attack       |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### River Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Cutting talons +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---20   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 10     | * |   |
|          | ongoing damage.                                  |   | 2 |
| Devil    |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 10 ongoing damage.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **Ripping tentacle +15 vs. AC**---10 damage      | D | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered until | * |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  | * |   |
|          | action (once per round) to use.                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Foreshadowed weakness):* When you  | * |   |
|          | choose to add the escalation die to an attack    | * |   |
|          | against a river devil, you only heal half the    |   |   |
|          | normal hit points the next time you heal using a | * |   |
|          | recovery this battle. The effect is cumulative   | * |   |
|          | (so the second time you heal, the third time,    | H |   |
|          | etc.) if you pay the *devil's due* more than     | P |   |
|          | once before using a recovery.                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist energy 13+:* When an energy attack       |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### The Final Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 13th   | **Mighty tentacles +18 vs. PD (3 attacks; can    | A | 28 |
| level    | target nearby enemies)**---50 damage             | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 28 |
| Leader   | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from    | * |    |
|          | each enemy and moves next to the Devil, which    |   | 13 |
| Devil    | engages and grabs it. (The Devil can grab any    | * | 00 |
|          | number of enemies simultaneously.) If it has     | * |    |
|          | quick actions left, it will use its *devil's     | P |    |
|          | beak* and *cutting talon* attacks.               | D |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Miss:* 30 damage.                               | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Cutting talon +18 (+22 against a grabbed       | * |    |
|          | enemy) vs. AC**---100 damage                     | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 50     | D |    |
|          | ongoing damage.                                  | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 50 ongoing damage.           |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  | * |    |
|          | action (once per round) to use.                  | H |    |
|          |                                                  | P |    |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Devil's beak +22 vs. AC  | * |    |
|          | (one enemy it's grabbing; includes +4 grab       | * |    |
|          | bonus)**---50 damage                             |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* 30 damage.                               |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  |   |    |
|          | action (once per round) to use.                  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Devil's due (Destiny):* When you choose to add  |   |    |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against the      |   |    |
|          | Final Devil, one of the Final Devil's nearby     |   |    |
|          | allies can make an attack as an interrupt action |   |    |
|          | before your attack.                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist energy 13+:* When an energy attack       |   |    |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |    |
|          | natural 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |    |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *The icons are speechless:* Icon relationship    |   |    |
|          | dice don't provide any help in a battle (or even |   |    |
|          | an adventure) that involves the Final Devil. The |   |    |
|          | Devil broke the icons' hold on it, and it's up   |   |    |
|          | to pure mortals to solve this problem, because   |   |    |
|          | the icons can't cope.                            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Lord of the waters:* If the Final Devil is      |   |    |
|          | fighting in a sea or river, when a nearby enemy  |   |    |
|          | rolls a normal save, it's a hard save (16+)      |   |    |
|          | instead. The same goes for easy saves; they're   |   |    |
|          | normal saves instead.                            |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### River Devil Minion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +24                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 13th   | **Tentacles and talons +18 vs. AC**---60 damage  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 20     | * | 5 |
| Mook     | ongoing damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Devil    | *Natural odd hit:* The target is vulnerable      | * | 5 |
|          | (save ends).                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Devil's due (Obsession):* When you choose to    | D | 0 |
|          | add the escalation die to an attack against a    | * | 0 |
|          | river devil minion, you must only attack river   | * |   |
|          | devil minions until the end of the battle or     |   |   |
|          | until all river devil minion mobs have dropped   | * |   |
|          | to 0 hp.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Devil, Hubris

[Nastier Specials for all hubris devils]{.underline}

*Friend or enemy?:* A hubris devil using NPCs to attack the heroes makes
it tough for them to know if there are friends or allies among the
attackers, forcing the characters to be more careful with their attacks.
Any natural 1--5 attack roll against the devil is an automatic miss with
no miss damage.

*Surprise!:* When the hubris devil attacks, it gains a surprise round
unless the PCs were extremely perceptive (by making a ridiculously hard
skill check for tier).

*Final-gasp soul snatch & escape:* When the devil drops to 0 hp, it
appears dead until the start of its next turn, at which point it will
attempt to steal a piece of the soul of the closest character before it
escapes into a supernatural bolt hole. That character must roll a save.
If they fail, they lose a chunk of their soul---see below for possible
effects. Anyone who uses a coup de grace on the devil before its next
turn will slay it before it can claim a chunk of a soul and escape (but
the PCs might not be aware of this).

**Effects:** What does it mean to have a chunk of your soul stolen.
You're free to come up with complications that suit your campaign's
metaphysics or take the suggestions that follow as a starting point. Use
one or more, as you choose.

-   Magic items no longer work for the affected character, even ones
    already attuned to them, and in a similar vein, no new items can be
    attuned by that PC.

-   The PC loses access to their highest level of spells or powers. For
    example, a cleric who normally casts 7th level spells could only
    cast them at 5th level.

-   The PC takes a --2 penalty to saves.

-   The PC must roll 2d20 for attack rolls and take the lowest result
    for the first two rounds of each battle.

-   The PC's appearance changes in some disturbing, hollow way and they
    take a --4 penalty to skill checks.

-   PC loses one to three recoveries; not temporarily, their ability to
    heal decreases.

-   One icon relationship changes to become a sign of complications with
    devils, not advantages.

-   Devils gets some huge combat advantage against the PC.

**Restoration:** Similarly, you can choose how the missing piece of soul
might be restored. Some examples:

-   No big deal: the PC rolls a normal save each time they gain a level.
    If the save succeeds, they get their soul back.

-   The party must find and kill the escaped hubris devil. Luckily, the
    PC's 'link' to the devil means that each day the PC can roll a
    normal save; on an 11+, they have a good idea of which direction the
    devil is in. And hubris devils don't move all that much.

-   Instead, the party must travel to the center of the devils' power
    and steal back their friend's soul shard. Or whatever it is that you
    think their particular soul piece is gonna look like.

-   The devils immediately barter the soul shard to an enemy icon,
    leading to an entirely new set of quests and complications.

#### Wandering Hubris Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | **Rain of blows +12 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---25    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 18+:* The target is dazed until the end | * |   |
|          | of its next turn.                                |   | 2 |
| Devil    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | **Crash and bash +12 vs. PD**---50 damage, and   | * |   |
|          | the target is hampered until the end of its next | P | 3 |
|          | turn.                                            | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Looming fear +12 vs. MD (1d4 nearby         | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---60 psychic damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* While the target has 36 hp or     | D |   |
|          | fewer, it's dazed (-4 attack) from fear and      | * |   |
|          | doesn't add the escalation die to its attacks    | * |   |
|          | (save ends all).                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Chakra suppression):* When you     | P |   |
|          | choose to add the escalation die to an attack    | * |   |
|          | against a great hubris devil, the devil can      | * |   |
|          | choose one of your magic items whose powers      |   |   |
|          | won't work for the rest of the battle (default   |   |   |
|          | bonuses still apply).                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist holy 13+:* When a holy attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Great Hubris Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Rain of blows +13 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---33    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | *Crit:* The target is dazed (save ends).         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Devil    | **Crushing weight +14 vs. PD**---70 damage, and  | * | 6 |
|          | the target is stuck (hard save ends, 16+)        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 6 |
|          | *Miss:* The target is hampered until the end of  | D | 0 |
|          | its next turn.                                   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Looming fear +14 vs. MD (1d4 nearby         |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---80 psychic damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* While the target has 60 hp or     | M |   |
|          | fewer, it's dazed (-4 attack) from fear and      | D |   |
|          | doesn't add the escalation die to its attacks    | * |   |
|          | (save ends all).                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Devil's due (Chakra suppression):* When you     | H |   |
|          | choose to add the escalation die to an attack    | P |   |
|          | against a great hubris devil, the devil can      | * |   |
|          | choose one of your magic items whose powers      | * |   |
|          | won't work for the rest of the battle (default   |   |   |
|          | bonuses still apply).                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist holy 13+:* When a holy attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Colossal Hubris Devil

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 27 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | **Omni strike +16 vs. AC (4 attacks)**---48      | A | 25 |
| level    | damage                                           | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 29 |
| Wrecker  | *Crit:* The target is weakened (save ends).      | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 12 |
| Devil    | **Folding the land +17 vs. PD**---160 damage,    | * | 00 |
|          | and the target is stuck and dazed (hard save     | * |    |
|          | ends both, 16+)                                  | P |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | *Miss:* The target is dazed and hampered until   | * |    |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Suffocating fear +17 vs. MD (1d6 nearby     | * |    |
|          | enemies)**---120 psychic damage                  | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* While the target has 120 hp or    | D |    |
|          | fewer, it's dazed (-4 attack) from fear and      | * |    |
|          | doesn't add the escalation die to its attacks    | * |    |
|          | (save ends all).                                 |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Devil's due (Terror):* When you choose to add   | P |    |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a        | * |    |
|          | colossal hubris devil, during its next turn the  | * |    |
|          | devil can make a *suffocating fear* attack       |   |    |
|          | against each character that has given it its due |   |    |
|          | this battle, even if it has already expended     |   |    |
|          | that attack. For example, if two PCs have given  |   |    |
|          | it its due, and a third does so, during the      |   |    |
|          | devil's next turn it can make a *suffocating     |   |    |
|          | fear* attack against those three PCs.            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist holy 13+:* When a holy attack targets    |   |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |    |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Dragon

All dragons have two standard abilities: *escalator* and *flight*. The
escalator ability allows the dragon to add the escalation die to its
attack rolls. The flight ability allows the dragon to fly---fairly well,
and quickly in a straight line, though not as maneuverable as more agile
fliers.

Dragons have a breath attack. Unlike most close attacks that target a
number of enemies, dragon breath attacks don't care about whether the
targets are in a group.

Young dragons are medium-sized. Adult dragons are usually large sized.
Huge-sized dragons are the exception, and have usually outgrown the
vulnerabilities of their weaker kin.

Some metallic dragons inspire debilitating awe in their enemies. The
*inspire awe* ability is similar to *fear*, but it's not fear, so its
effect can combine with the dazed condition. Enemies at a hit point
threshold or lower take a --4 penalty to limited attacks (attacks that
aren't basic or at-will) against the dragon---the enemy's confidence in
their own heroism/puissance is shaken.

Each metallic dragon has an at-will breath weapon attack that uses the
natural result of the first attack roll to determine how long the dragon
must wait before it can use the breath weapon again.

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Natural   Variable Waiting Period for Metallic Dragon's At-Will Breath
  Attack    Attack
  Roll      
  --------- -------------------------------------------------------------
  1-5       The dragon can use its breath weapon again next turn.

  6-10      The dragon must wait one turn before it can use its breath
            weapon.

  11+       After waiting one turn, the dragon rolls a normal save at the
            start of its next turn. If it succeeds, it can use its breath
            weapon that turn. Otherwise, it keeps rolling a save at the
            start of each turn until it regains its breath weapon attack.
            Once it uses its breath again, use the attack roll again to
            determine its next *breath weapon* attack.
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

All dragons have distinct personalities. A few have unique features.
They are smart enough not to fight to their own death.

Dragons may have random abilities. This table is for chromatic dragons.
For GMs who are uncertain whether a medium dragon should have a random
ability, roll a d8. Otherwise, roll a d12. If the roll is less than or
equal to the dragon's level, it gets a random ability according to the
table below. Some huge dragons have two abilities. If you want to give
the dragon a chance of having one of the abilities that has campaign
implications, add +2 to the roll.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d8 or   Dragon Ability  Description (for Chromatic Dragons)
  d12 or                  
  d12 + 2                 
  ------- --------------- ---------------------------------------------------
  1       True seeing     The dragon is immune to invisibility and ignores
                          any illusions.

  2       Whipping tail   When an enemy engaged with the dragon rolls a
                          natural 1 or 2 with an attack roll, the dragon can
                          make an opportunity attack against that creature as
                          a free action. The attack is set up by the dragon's
                          whipping tail but delivered by the dragon's usual
                          melee attack.

  3       Tough Hide      The dragon has a +1 bonus to AC.

  4       Twisted Mind    The dragon has a +2 bonus to MD.

  5       Nimble          The dragon has a +2 bonus to PD.

  6       No              Unlike other dragons of its color, this dragon has
          vulnerability   no vulnerability. The PCs will figure that out the
                          first time they try to use its supposed
                          vulnerability against it.

  7       Now I'm mad!    The first time the dragon is staggered each battle,
                          it uses its breath weapon attack as a free action
                          that does not count against the normal uses of its
                          breath.

  8       Serious threat  Disengage checks against the dragon take a --5
                          penalty. When a creature fails to disengage from
                          the dragon, it takes damage equal to double the
                          dragon's level.

  9       PC-style racial The dragon has one of the racial powers of a player
          power           character race. The most common expressions per
                          color are: white (halfling); black (halfling,
                          half-orc, human, wood elf); green (dwarf, dark
                          elf); blue (high elf, half-orc); red (half-orc,
                          human, wood elf).

  10      Raw power       Until it is staggered, the dragon rolls 2d20 with
                          its melee attacks and uses the higher roll.

  11      Damage aura     When an enemy starts its turn engaged with the
                          dragon, it takes damage equal to the dragon's level
                          (adventurer tier), double the level (champion
                          tier), or triple the level (epic tier). The damage
                          type is the same as the dragon's breath weapon.

  12      More breath     The dragon can use its intermittent breath 1d4 more
                          times each battle. If its breath weapon isn't
                          intermittent (white and green dragons), the dragon
                          gains the extra uses anyway, making it more
                          dangerous than lesser specimens of its color.

  13      Humanoid form   The dragon is capable of shapechanging into a
                          humanoid form, usually of a warrior or spellcaster
                          appropriate to its nature and usually not obviously
                          draconic, registering as a normal humanoid. The
                          dragon has the PC-style racial power of their
                          humanoid form, but only while in shapechanged form.

  14      Some Unique     The dragon has an entirely unique characteristic,
          Thing           something akin to a player character's one unique
                          thing except that the dragon's version may be
                          relevant to combat. GM, if you don't feel like
                          making something up, choose an ability from the
                          list above.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

Metallic dragons also have special abilities, though they differ
slightly from the chromatic dragons' abilities.

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  d20   Dragon Ability Description (for Metallic Dragons)
  ----- -------------- ------------------------------------------------------
  1     True seeing    The dragon is immune to invisibility and ignores
                       illusions.

  2     Whipping tail  When an enemy engaged with the dragon rolls a natural
                       1 or 2 with an attack roll, the dragon can make an
                       opportunity attack against that creature as a free
                       action. The attack is set up by the dragon's whipping
                       tail but delivered by the dragon's usual melee attack.

  3     Tough hide     The dragon has a +1 bonus to AC.

  4     Fortress mind  The dragon has a +2 bonus to MD.

  5     Nimble         The dragon has a +2 bonus to PD.

  6     Murderous      The crit range of the dragon's melee attacks expands
                       by 2.

  7     Now I'm mad!   The first time the dragon is staggered each battle, it
                       uses its breath weapon attack as a free action that
                       does not count against the normal uses of its breath.

  8     Serious threat Disengage checks against the dragon take a --5
                       penalty. When a creature fails to disengage from the
                       dragon, it takes damage equal to double the dragon's
                       level.

  9     PC-style       The dragon has one of the racial powers of a player
        racial power   character race. If the dragon's story suggests a
                       specific power, choose that. Otherwise, use the most
                       common expression per color: brass (gnome, halfling);
                       bronze (dark elf, dwarf, half-orc, human); copper
                       (dwarf, human, wood elf); silver (forgeborn, wood
                       elf); gold (high elf, holy one, human, wood elf).

  10    Raw power      Until it's staggered, the dragon rolls 2d20 with its
                       melee attacks and uses the higher roll.

  11    Damage aura    When an enemy starts its turn engaged with the dragon,
                       it takes damage equal to the dragon's level
                       (adventurer tier), double the level (champion tier),
                       or triple the level (epic tier). The damage type is
                       the same as the dragon's breath weapon.

  12    More breath    The dragon gains a +5 bonus to saves to regain its
                       breath weapon.

  13    Spellbreaker   When the dragon hits a creature with an attack, one
                       spell effect that creature created is negated (hard
                       save ends, 16+). Once the creature saves, the effect
                       returns.

  14    Shake off      At the start of each of its turns, the dragon can roll
                       a save against one save ends effect on it.

  15    Free to flee   Like the PCs, the dragon can escape at any time by
                       giving up what amounts for it to a campaign loss. If
                       the PCs are the ones to benefit from this, they should
                       experience this as a major victory. But the dragon is
                       still out there.

  16    Air supremacy  The crit range of the dragon's attacks against flying
                       creatures expands by an amount equal to the escalation
                       die.

  17    Denial         If a PC or other creature uses an attack against the
                       dragon that is related to an icon that the dragon also
                       has a relationship with, the dragon gains a +5 bonus
                       to all defenses against that attack, and it only takes
                       damage from the attack without suffering any of its
                       effects.

  18    Survivor       Each time the dragon drops to 0 hit points, it can
                       roll a save. The first save in a battle is easy (6+),
                       the second normal, the third and subsequent saves are
                       hard (16+). If it succeeds, the dragon stays conscious
                       and takes no damage from the attack or effect that
                       would have dropped it.

  19    Humanoid form  The dragon is capable of shapechanging into a humanoid
                       form, usually of a warrior or spellcaster appropriate
                       to its nature and usually not obviously draconic,
                       registering as a normal human or elf or whatever. This
                       ability is best used for long-term dragon characters
                       that make it worth the GM's time to create a double-
                       or triple-strength humanoid monster to represent the
                       shapechanged form. The dragon has the PC-style racial
                       power of their humanoid form, but only while in
                       shapechanged form. Shapechanging is a move action.

  20    Some unique    The dragon has an entirely unique characteristic,
        thing          something akin to a player character's one unique
                       thing except that the dragon's version may be relevant
                       to combat. GM, if you don't feel like making something
                       up, choose an ability from the list above.
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

#### White Dragon Hatchling

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claws and bite +6 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---4      | * | 2 |
| Troop     | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 8 |
| Dragon    | *Natural 16+:* The hatchling can make an *ice     | * |   |
|           | breath* attack as a free action.                  | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Ice breath +6 vs.      | D |   |
|           | PD**---4 cold damage                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* The hatchling takes 1d3       |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Freezing vapors:* When the hatchling scores a    | M |   |
|           | critical hit, it prevents the escalation die from | D |   |
|           | increasing at the start of the next round.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist cold 12+:* When a cold attack targets     |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a 12+ on    | * |   |
|           | the attack roll or the dragon takes half damage.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Brass Dragon (Metallic)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Flurry of claws +6 vs. AC**---5 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a *babble*     | * | 2 |
| Troop     | attack as a free action.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *Miss:* 3 damage.                                 | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Babble +7 vs. MD (each | P | 3 |
|           | enemy engaged with the dragon)**---The target is  | D | 1 |
|           | dazed (save ends)                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Fiery breath +6 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies   |   |   |
|           | in a group)**---5 fire damage, or 7 fire damage   | * |   |
|           | against a dazed, weakened, or stunned target      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can pop free from the    | D |   |
|           | target.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 12+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | H |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | P |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium White Dragon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claws and bite +6 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---4      | * | 5 |
| Troop     | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *Natural 16+:* The white dragon can make an *ice  | * | 1 |
|           | breath* attack as a free action.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Ice breath +6 vs. PD   | D | 8 |
|           | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---4 cold damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 1d4   |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist cold 12+:* When a cold attack targets     | M |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | D |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Catacomb Dragon (Black)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | Vulnerability: thunder                           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Acid fangs +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---8 damage, | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | and 5 ongoing acid damage                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The dragon regains   | * | 5 |
|          | the use of its *caustic breath* if it's expended | * |   |
|          | and can use it during its next turn.             | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | **C: Caustic breath +7 vs. PD (1d3 nearby        | * | 4 |
|          | enemies)**---10 acid damage, 5 ongoing acid      | * |   |
|          | damage, and the target is caught in an acidic    |   |   |
|          | haze (see below) with an effect that depends on  | * |   |
|          | the roll                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* While in the haze, the       | D |   |
|          | target is dazed from choking or blinding.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* While in the haze, the target |   |   |
|          | takes a --5 penalty to all saves against acid    | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Miss:* 5 ongoing acid damage.                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Acidic haze:* The haze is magical, semi-aware,  | * |   |
|          | and remains around the target until the end of   |   |   |
|          | the battle or until removed magically. A         |   |   |
|          | spellcaster can cast a spell that targets AC or  |   |   |
|          | PD to attack the haze and destroy it---the haze  |   |   |
|          | has 1 HP and an AC/PD of 22. The GM is           |   |   |
|          | encouraged to play fast and loose with physics   |   |   |
|          | here: the mist can be burned, condensed/frozen,  |   |   |
|          | blown away, absorbed, transmuted, etc. At the    |   |   |
|          | GM's discretion, there may be physical ways to   |   |   |
|          | remove the haze, but it should require a hard    |   |   |
|          | DC.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *All-terrain terror:* A catacomb dragon flies    |   |   |
|          | reasonably well, powerful and fast in a straight |   |   |
|          | line though it's not as maneuverable as more     |   |   |
|          | agile flyers. It can also burrow quickly and     |   |   |
|          | effectively due to the acidic coating on its     |   |   |
|          | skin.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Corrosive contact:* When an enemy is engaged    |   |   |
|          | with the catacomb dragon at the start of its     |   |   |
|          | turn, it takes 3 acid damage.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist acid 14+:* When an acid attack targets   |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cenotaph Dragon (White)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claws and bite +7 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---6      | * | 8 |
| Troop     | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *Natural 16+:* The cenotaph dragon can make an    | * | 4 |
|           | *infused ice breath* attack as a free action.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Infused ice breath +7  | D | 8 |
|           | vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---6 cold damage     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 20:* The target also takes 5 ongoing     |   |   |
|           | holy damage (in addition to double damage for     | * |   |
|           | crit).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 1d6   | D |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist cold and negative energy 12+:* When a     |   |   |
|           | cold or negative energy attack targets this       | * |   |
|           | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 12+ on | * |   |
|           | the attack roll or it only deals half damage.     | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Brass Dragon (Metallic)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Flurry of claws +7 vs. AC**---15 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a *babble*     | * | 3 |
| Troop     | attack as a free action.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Babble +8 vs. MD (each | * | 7 |
|           | enemy engaged with the dragon)**---The target is  | * |   |
|           | dazed (save ends)                                 | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | **C: Fiery breath +7 vs. PD (1d3 nearby           | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---15 fire damage, or 20 fire damage    | * |   |
|           | against a dazed, weakened, or stunned target      |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can pop free from the    | * |   |
|           | target.                                           | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Black Dragon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claws and bite +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---4      | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 4 ongoing    | * | 5 |
|           | acid damage.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | **C: Acid breath +9 vs. PD (1d3 nearby            | D | 2 |
|           | enemies)**---5 acid damage, and 5 ongoing acid    | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 3 acid damage.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Draconic grace:* At the start of each of the     | M |   |
|           | black dragon's turns, roll a d6 to see if it gets | D |   |
|           | an extra standard action. If the roll is equal to | * |   |
|           | or less than the escalation die, the black dragon | * |   |
|           | can take an extra standard action that turn.      |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | After the first success, the grace die bumps up   | * |   |
|           | to a d8. After the second success, it's a d10,    | H |   |
|           | then a d12 after the third success, and finally a | P |   |
|           | d20 after the fourth one.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Intermittent breath:* A medium black dragon can  |   |   |
|           | use *acid breath* 1d3 times per battle, but never |   |   |
|           | two turns in a row.                               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Water-breathing:* Black dragons swim well and    |   |   |
|           | can breathe underwater.                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist acid 12+:* When an acid attack targets    |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Bronze Dragon (Metallic)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Crushing bite +8 vs. AC**---11 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can pop free from one   | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | enemy engaged with it.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | **C: Lightning breath +8 vs. PD (1d6 nearby or    | * | 3 |
|           | faraway enemies in a rough line)**---8 lightning  | * |   |
|           | damage, and the closest target hit is dazed (save | P | 5 |
|           | ends)                                             | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist lightning 12+:* When a lightning attack   | * |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   | * |   |
|           | natural 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals   | M |   |
|           | half damage.                                      | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Rugged defenses:* When a creature attacks the    | * |   |
|           | dragon, if it used another action this turn       |   |   |
|           | before the attack, the dragon gains a +4 bonus to | * |   |
|           | all defenses against the attack.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Huge Brass Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Flurry of claws +8 vs. AC**---25 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a             | * | 4 |
| Troop    | *mind-bending babble* attack as a free action.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Mind-bending babble   | * | 8 |
|          | +9 vs. MD (each enemy engaged with the           | * |   |
|          | dragon)**---The target is dazed (save ends)      | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target is confused instead of | * | 5 |
|          | dazed (save ends).                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +8 vs. PD (1d3 nearby          | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---25 fire damage, or 30 fire damage   | * |   |
|          | against a dazed, weakened, or stunned target     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can pop free from the   | * |   |
|          | target.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Inspire awe:* While an enemy has 24 hp or       | H |   |
|          | fewer, it takes a --4 penalty to limited attacks | P |   |
|          | against the dragon.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large White Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Claws and bite +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---12    | * | 7 |
| Troop    | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The white dragon can make an *ice | * | 3 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Ice breath +8 vs. PD  | D | 0 |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---10 cold damage          | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 2d4  |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    | M |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | D |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Copper Dragon (Metallic)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Needle-sharp claws and teeth +8 vs. AC (2       | A |   |
| level     | attacks)**---7 damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | *First natural 11+ each turn:* The dragon can     | * |   |
|           | make an *acrid smoke* attack as a free action.    |   | 1 |
| Dragon    |                                                   | * | 8 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Acrid smoke +9 vs. PD  | * |   |
|           | (up to 3 enemies engaged with the dragon)**---The | P | 4 |
|           | target is hampered until the end of its next turn | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Acid breath +9 vs. PD (1d4 nearby            | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---4 acid damage, and 4 ongoing acid    |   |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 2 ongoing acid damage.                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Out-think:* Once per battle as a free action     | * |   |
|           | when an enemy rolls a natural even hit against    | * |   |
|           | the dragon, the dragon negates the attack (no     |   |   |
|           | damage or effects).                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 12+:* When a fire attack targets     | H |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | P |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Swift mind:* Once per battle as a free action    |   |   |
|           | when an attack targets the dragon's MD, it can    |   |   |
|           | force the attacker to reroll the attack.          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Green Dragon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: psychic                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Sharp claws +9 vs. AC**---7 damage              | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 11--15:* The dragon can make a *bite*    |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | attack as a free action.                          | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The dragon can make a *poison      | P | 6 |
|           | breath* attack as a free action.                  | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +9 vs. AC**---10     | * |   |
|           | damage                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 5 ongoing    | * |   |
|           | poison damage.                                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Poison breath +9 vs.   | * |   |
|           | PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---7 poison damage, and  | * |   |
|           | the target is hampered (save ends)                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Resist poison 12+:* When a poison attack targets | P |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gorge Dragon (Black)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Coiling +10 vs. PD**---18 damage, and the      | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | dragon grabs the target; while grabbed, the      | * |   |
|          | target takes 9 damage at the start of each of    |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | its turns                                        | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The dragon regains   | P | 1 |
|          | the use of its *dazzling breath* if it's         | D | 6 |
|          | expended and can use it during its next turn.    | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Bite +13 (includes grab bonus) vs. AC (one     |   |   |
|          | enemy it's grabbing)**---25 damage               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes no damage and is | M |   |
|          | instead swallowed whole (see below).             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a free action.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Dazzling breath +9 vs. MD (1d3 nearby       | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---14 damage, and if the target has 40 | * |   |
|          | HP or fewer after being hit, it's weakened until | H |   |
|          | the end of its next turn                         | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Swallowed whole:* A creature that is swallowed  |   |   |
|          | whole must start making last gasp saves during   |   |   |
|          | its next turn. An ally can assist with the save  |   |   |
|          | as normal, but the save remains hard (16+) in    |   |   |
|          | that case. A roll of 16--19 causes the creature  |   |   |
|          | to be regurgitated from the dragon's gut, while  |   |   |
|          | a 20 means that the creature cuts/rips a hole    |   |   |
|          | through the dragon's flesh to escape (dealing    |   |   |
|          | basic attack damage automatically).              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Chain constrictor:* The gorge dragon can have   |   |   |
|          | up to two enemies grabbed at the same time.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 14+:* When a cold attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Water-breathing:* Gorge dragons swim well and   |   |   |
|          | can breathe underwater.                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Huge White Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Claws and bite +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25    | * | 8 |
| Troop    | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The white dragon can make an *ice | * | 4 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Ice breath +9 vs. PD  | D | 0 |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---20 cold damage          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 2d8  |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 18+:* When a cold attack targets    | M |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | D |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Mausoleum Dragon (White)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Claws and bite +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---16    | * | 0 |
| Troop    | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The mausoleum dragon can make an  | * | 6 |
|          | *infused ice breath* attack as a free action.    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Infused ice breath +9 | D | 4 |
|          | vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---14 cold damage   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 7      |   |   |
|          | ongoing holy damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 2d6  | M |   |
|          | damage.                                          | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Infused blood:* When an enemy scores a critical | * |   |
|          | hit against the mausoleum dragon, the dragon     |   |   |
|          | gains the following ability until the end of the | * |   |
|          | battle: When an enemy is engaged with the dragon | * |   |
|          | at the start of its turn, it takes 5 holy        | H |   |
|          | damage.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold and negative energy 16+:* When a    | * |   |
|          | cold or negative energy attack targets this      |   |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+   |   |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Blue Dragon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 5th     | Vulnerability: force                              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Dragon claw +9 vs. AC**---10 damage             | * | 9 |
| Caster    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The dragon can make a |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *bite* attack as a free action.                   | * | 9 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +9 vs. AC**---10     | P | 7 |
|           | damage, and 2d6 lightning damage                  | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Lightning breath +9 vs. PD (1d3 nearby       | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---8 lightning damage                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is also dazed      | * |   |
|           | (save ends).                                      | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Counter-spell:* When an enemy targets the blue   | * |   |
|           | dragon with a spell, the dragon can roll a save;  | * |   |
|           | success means the spell has no effect on the      |   |   |
|           | dragon. If the level of the spell is lower than   | * |   |
|           | the dragon's level, it's a normal save (11+).     | * |   |
|           | Against an equal or higher-level spell, the save  | H |   |
|           | is a hard save (16+). If the dragon is staggered, | P |   |
|           | the save target increases by +5 (normal becomes   | * |   |
|           | hard, hard becomes 21+: impossible unless the     | * |   |
|           | dragon has a save bonus from some other source).  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Intermittent breath:* A medium blue dragon can   |   |   |
|           | use *lightning breath* 1d4 times per battle, but  |   |   |
|           | never two turns in a row.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist lightning 12+:* When a lightning attack   |   |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   |   |   |
|           | natural 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals   |   |   |
|           | half damage.                                      |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blizzard Dragon (White)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Claws and bite +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---18   | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The blizzard dragon can make a    | * | 5 |
|          | *blizzard breath* attack as a free action.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Blizzard breath +10   | D | 7 |
|          | vs. PD (each nearby creature)**---20 cold        | * | 5 |
|          | damage, and 5 ongoing cold damage                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target takes 10 ongoing cold  | * |   |
|          | damage instead of 5.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The dragon takes 2d6  | D |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Continuous breath:* A blizzard dragon can use   |   |   |
|          | *blizzard breath* as its standard action during  | * |   |
|          | the round after it uses the breath as a free     | * |   |
|          | action. Blizzard breath doesn't deal miss damage | H |   |
|          | to the dragon when used as a standard action.    | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 14+:* When a cold attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wreathed in snow and cold:* When an enemy is    |   |   |
|          | engaged with the blizzard dragon at the start of |   |   |
|          | its turn, it takes 5 cold damage.                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Black Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: thunder                           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Claws and bite +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---18   | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 10 ongoing  | * | 8 |
|          | acid damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **C: Acid breath +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby          | D | 6 |
|          | enemies)**---20 acid damage, and 10 ongoing acid | * | 0 |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 acid damage.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Draconic grace:* At the start of each of the    | M |   |
|          | black dragon's turns, roll a d6 to see if it     | D |   |
|          | gets an extra standard action. If the roll is    | * |   |
|          | equal to or less than the escalation die, the    | * |   |
|          | black dragon can take an extra standard action   |   |   |
|          | that turn.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | After the first success, the grace die bumps up  | H |   |
|          | to a d8. After the second success, it's a d10,   | P |   |
|          | then a d12 after the third success, and finally  | * |   |
|          | a d20 after the fourth one.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A large black dragon can  |   |   |
|          | use *acid breath* 1d3 times per battle, but      |   |   |
|          | never two turns in a row.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Water-breathing:* Black dragons swim well and   |   |   |
|          | can breathe underwater.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist acid 16+:* When an acid attack targets   |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Bronze Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Crushing bite +11 vs. AC**---45 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can pop free from one  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | enemy engaged with it.                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | **C: Lightning breath +11 vs. PD (1d6 nearby or  | * | 6 |
|          | faraway enemies in a rough line)**---32          | * |   |
|          | lightning damage, and the closest target hit is  | P | 2 |
|          | dazed (save ends)                                | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist lightning 16+:* When a lightning attack  | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | M |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Rugged defenses:* When a creature attacks the   | * |   |
|          | dragon, if it used another action this turn      |   |   |
|          | before the attack, the dragon gains a +4 bonus   | * |   |
|          | to all defenses against the attack.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Red Dragon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | Vulnerability: cold                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Fangs, claws, and tail +11 vs. AC (2            | * | 0 |
| Wrecker   | attacks)**---8 damage                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Dragon    | *First natural even hit or miss each turn:* Roll  | * | 6 |
|           | another *fangs, claws, and tail* attack.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | **C: Fiery breath +11 vs. PD (2d3 nearby          | D | 0 |
|           | enemies)**---10 fire damage                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Intermittent breath:* A medium red dragon can    | * |   |
|           | use *fiery breath* 1d3 times per battle, but      | M |   |
|           | never two turns in a row.                         | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | Resist fire 12+: When a fire attack targets this  | * |   |
|           | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 12+ on |   |   |
|           | the attack roll or it only deals half damage.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Silver Dragon (Metallic)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Swift, keen claws +10 vs. AC**---15 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can make a *paralyzing   | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   | smoke* attack as a free action.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Dragon    | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Paralyzing smoke +11   | * | 1 |
|           | vs. MD (1d3 enemies engaged with the              | * |   |
|           | dragon)**---The target must roll an immediate     | P | 9 |
|           | save. On a failure, the target can't take any     | D | 0 |
|           | actions and is helpless until the start of the    | * |   |
|           | dragon's next turn as its limbs become paralyzed. | * |   |
|           | On a success, the target is dazed until the end   |   |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Ice breath +11 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies in | M |   |
|           | a group)**---10 cold damage, and the closest      | D |   |
|           | target hit is dazed until the start of the        | * |   |
|           | dragon's next turn                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Evasive turn:* Once per battle as a free action  | H |   |
|           | when an attack targets the dragon, it can force   | P |   |
|           | the attacker to reroll the attack and has *resist | * |   |
|           | damage 12+* against that attack.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist cold 12+:* When a cold attack targets     |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Green Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: psychic                           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Sharp claws +12 vs. AC**---25 damage           | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 11--15:* The dragon can make a *bite*   |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | attack as a free action.                         | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The dragon can make a *poison     | P | 2 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | D | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +12 vs. AC**---38   | * |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 10 ongoing  | * |   |
|          | poison damage.                                   | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Poison breath +12 vs. | * |   |
|          | PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---25 poison damage,    | * |   |
|          | and the target is hampered (save ends)           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Burrow*                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Resist poison 16+:* When an acid attack targets | P |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medium Gold Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Ferocious bite +13 vs. AC**---20 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a             | * | 8 |
| Caster   | *stultifying smoke* attack as a free action.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Stultifying smoke +13 | * | 2 |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy engaged with the               | * |   |
|          | dragon)**---The target is stunned until the      | P | 8 |
|          | start of the dragon's next turn                  | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +13 vs. PD (up to 5 nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---14 fire damage           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Spiral of golden flame:* Once per battle as a   | D |   |
|          | quick action while the escalation die is 3+, the | * |   |
|          | dragon can fly into the air, popping free from   | * |   |
|          | all enemies engaged with it, and make a *fiery   |   |   |
|          | breath* attack against each enemy that was       | * |   |
|          | engaged with it.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Indomitability:* Once per battle as a free      | P |   |
|          | action at the start of its turn, the dragon can  | * |   |
|          | cancel all effects and conditions on it,         | * |   |
|          | including ongoing damage. It can cancel these    |   |   |
|          | effects even if it's prevented from taking       |   |   |
|          | actions, such as by being stunned.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 12+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Moon Dragon (White)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Claws and bite +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---40   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Troop    | *Natural 16+:* The moon dragon can make an *ice  | * |   |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 |   | 1 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 7 |
|          | *Both attacks miss:* If the full moon is within  | * |   |
|          | seven days, the moon dragon's next *ice breath*  | P | 3 |
|          | attack this battle will deal double damage.      | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Ice breath +12 vs. PD | * |   |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---32 cold damage          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Lunar resonance:* A moon dragon gains a +1      | * |   |
|          | bonus to attacks when the full moon is within    | M |   |
|          | seven days or when within its lair. A moon       | D |   |
|          | dragon takes a --1 penalty to all defenses and   | * |   |
|          | gains *vulnerability: fire* when the new moon is | * |   |
|          | within seven days.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 18+:* When a cold attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | H |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | P |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Void Dragon (Black)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Jaws and claws +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---26   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Caster   | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The dragon regains   | * |   |
|          | the use of its *ensorceling breath* if it's      |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | expended and can use it during its next turn.    | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 13 damage.                               | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 9 |
|          | **C: Ensorceling breath +12 vs. PD (1d3 nearby   | * | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---24 damage, and the dragon's breath  | * |   |
|          | coalesces into two small void beasts of rapidly  |   |   |
|          | shifting form (see below)                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The dragon's breath coalesces into one   | M |   |
|          | small void beast (see below).                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Void beasts:* Each beast appears next to the    | * |   |
|          | dragon, acts as it wishes, and enters the        |   |   |
|          | initiative order after the next two creatures    | * |   |
|          | have taken their turns. See void beast stats at  | * |   |
|          | end of the entry.                                | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Draconic grace:* At the start of each of the    |   |   |
|          | void dragon's turns, roll a d6 to see if it gets |   |   |
|          | an extra standard action. If the roll is equal   |   |   |
|          | to or less than the escalation die, the void     |   |   |
|          | dragon can take an extra standard action that    |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | After the first success, the grace die bumps up  |   |   |
|          | to a d8. After the second success, it's a d10,   |   |   |
|          | then a d12 after the third success, and finally  |   |   |
|          | a d20 after the fourth one.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Level 6 Void Beast]{.underline}                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Slam +11 vs. AC**---18 damage                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The void beast       |   |   |
|          | spawns a new void beast at full hit points. It   |   |   |
|          | follows the same rules for beasts formed by      |   |   |
|          | *ensorceling breath*.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | AC 22                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | PD 20                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | MD 18                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | HP 27                                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Volcano Dragon (Red)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Fangs, claws, and wings +12 vs. AC (2          | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | attacks)**---18 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 5 extra damage   | * | 6 |
|          | from a wing buffet.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target takes 10 extra damage  | D | 2 |
|          | from a claw strike.                              | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Tail smash +12 vs. PD    |   |   |
|          | (one nearby enemy)**---18 damage                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 9 damage.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* When a nearby enemy attacks and   | * |   |
|          | rolls a natural even hit against the dragon, the | * |   |
|          | dragon can make a *tail smash* attack against it |   |   |
|          | as a free action.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Volcanic breath +12 vs. PD (each nearby     | H |   |
|          | enemy)**---20 fire damage, and 5 ongoing fire    | P |   |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target takes 10 ongoing fire  |   |   |
|          | damage instead of 5.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Burning skin:* When an enemy is engaged with    |   |   |
|          | the volcanic dragon at the start of its turn, it |   |   |
|          | takes 5 fire damage.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Continuous breath:* A volcanic dragon can use   |   |   |
|          | *volcanic breath* 1d3 times per battle, but if   |   |   |
|          | it does not use its breath weapon on consecutive |   |   |
|          | rounds, it loses its remaining *volcanic breath* |   |   |
|          | attacks for the battle.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 14+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Blue Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: force                             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Double claws +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15     | * | 2 |
| Caster   | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *Natural even hit or miss:* The dragon can make  | * | 2 |
|          | a *bite* attack as a free action.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +12 vs. AC**---20   | D | 6 |
|          | damage, and 2d10 lightning damage                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Lightning breath +12 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or  |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies)**---40 lightning damage         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is also dazed     | M |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A large blue dragon can   | * |   |
|          | use *lightning breath* 1d6 times per battle, but |   |   |
|          | never two turns in a row.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Counter-spell:* When an enemy targets the blue  | H |   |
|          | dragon with a spell, the dragon can roll a save; | P |   |
|          | success means the spell has no effect on the     | * |   |
|          | dragon. If the level of the spell is lower than  | * |   |
|          | the dragon's level, it's a normal save (11+).    |   |   |
|          | Against an equal or higher-level spell, the save |   |   |
|          | is a hard save (16+). If the dragon is           |   |   |
|          | staggered, the save target increases by +5       |   |   |
|          | (normal becomes hard, hard becomes 21+:          |   |   |
|          | impossible unless the dragon has a save bonus    |   |   |
|          | from some other source).                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist lightning 16+:* When a lightning attack  |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Shadow Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Shadow claws +13 vs. AC**---50 psychic damage  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is confused (hard save | * | 2 |
| Caster   | ends, 16+).                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | **C: Nightmare breath +12 vs. MD (1d3 nearby or  | * | 2 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---60 negative energy damage,  | * |   |
|          | and the target becomes a living shadow (hard     | P | 2 |
|          | save ends, 16+)                                  | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Living shadow:* While a living shadow, the      | * |   |
|          | target can't physically interact with or gain    |   |   |
|          | aid from companions or aid them (including       | * |   |
|          | healing, bonuses, and effects) but is otherwise  | * |   |
|          | "normal".                                        | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, but the ability         | * |   |
|          | recharges when the dragon is staggered. If it    | * |   |
|          | hasn't already made a *nightmare breath* attack  |   |   |
|          | when it becomes staggered, the dragon makes the  | * |   |
|          | attack as a free action and then the breath      | * |   |
|          | recharges.                                       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Made of shadow:* The shadow dragon perceives    | * |   |
|          | the invisible, is unaffected by the *blur*       | * |   |
|          | spell, and ignores illusions. Rogues attempting  |   |   |
|          | to *shadow walk* near a shadow dragon end up in  |   |   |
|          | the dragon's belly (save ends). While there,     |   |   |
|          | they are helpless and take 2d12 damage at the    |   |   |
|          | start of each of their turns until they save and |   |   |
|          | fall back out of shadow.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadowy escalation:* When in poorly lit areas   |   |   |
|          | of shadow, the dragon adds the escalation die to |   |   |
|          | its attack rolls. Complete darkness or bright    |   |   |
|          | daylight negates the ability.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow illusions:* As a standard action, the    |   |   |
|          | dragon can appear to be humanoid, usually        |   |   |
|          | disguising itself as an unthreatening old man in |   |   |
|          | a cloak (DC 35 to detect). Daylight will show    |   |   |
|          | the illusion for what it is---an insubstantial   |   |   |
|          | dragon. Dragons with a *Book of Many Faces* will |   |   |
|          | have perfect humanoid disguises. Dropping the    |   |   |
|          | illusion is a free action.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadowy phasing:* When the escalation die is    |   |   |
|          | even, natural odd attack rolls against the       |   |   |
|          | dragon automatically miss. When the escalation   |   |   |
|          | die is odd, natural even attack rolls against    |   |   |
|          | the dragon automatically miss. Attacks that deal |   |   |
|          | holy damage ignore this ability.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [On Holy Ground]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | While on "holy ground" such as a temple or       |   |   |
|          | consecrated shrine, all hard saves against       |   |   |
|          | shadow dragon effects become normal saves. As a  |   |   |
|          | standard action, a cleric who invokes the gods   |   |   |
|          | can produce a similar anti-shadow effect in the  |   |   |
|          | nearby area until the start of their next turn,  |   |   |
|          | or they can turn hard saves against shadow       |   |   |
|          | dragon abilities to easy saves if that area is   |   |   |
|          | already on holy ground. Shadow dragons try to    |   |   |
|          | avoid holy ground, and shadow thieves can only   |   |   |
|          | enter it while possessing victims and will flee  |   |   |
|          | once the possession ends. It's up to the GM what |   |   |
|          | counts as "holy ground" in their game.           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Shadow Thief

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Shadow strangulation +13 vs. PD**---20 psychic | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Mook     | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 20 negative      | * |   |
|          | energy damage, and the shadow thief can make a   |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | *shadow possession* attack as a free action (but | * | 6 |
|          | see *group ability*).                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Shadow possession +13   | D | 8 |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy hit by *shadow                 | * |   |
|          | strangulation*)**---The shadow thief "crawls     | * |   |
|          | inside" the target. The target is confused (save |   |   |
|          | ends), and the shadow thief can't be the target  | * |   |
|          | of an attack or effect until it's forced from    | * |   |
|          | the target's body when that creature saves       | M |   |
|          | against the confusion effect.                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Group ability:* For every four shadow thieves   | * |   |
|          | in the battle (round up), one of them can use    |   |   |
|          | *shadow possession* during the battle.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shadow thievery:* The shadow thief is an        | H |   |
|          | extension of the shadow dragon, not really a     | P |   |
|          | separate entity. When it drops to 0 hp, it flees | * |   |
|          | back to the shadow dragon and merges with it.    | * |   |
|          | When this happens, if there is at least one      |   |   |
|          | enemy engaged with that shadow thief, the thief  |   |   |
|          | chooses one enemy engaged with it. Roll a d20;   |   |   |
|          | on a 16+, the shadow thief steals a random magic |   |   |
|          | item from the chosen enemy as it flees back to   |   |   |
|          | the dragon (but see *stop...thief* below).       |   |   |
|          | Stolen items are replaced with shadowy           |   |   |
|          | duplicates that work until the end of the battle |   |   |
|          | then fade to nothingness. The items can be       |   |   |
|          | recovered if the dragon is slain in the same     |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stop...thief!* When a shadow thief steals an    |   |   |
|          | item, the creature it steals from can choose to  |   |   |
|          | prevent the theft, but at a cost. If the natural |   |   |
|          | d20 thievery roll was odd, the target of the     |   |   |
|          | thievery attempt can choose to keep the item but |   |   |
|          | become hampered (save ends) as they wrestle with |   |   |
|          | the shadow. If the natural thievery roll was     |   |   |
|          | even, the target has the same choice, but it's a |   |   |
|          | hard save (16+) to end the hampered effect.      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Empyrean Dragon (Black)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Gleaming bite +14 vs. AC**---50 damage, and    | A |   |
| level    | one effect triggers based on the head that       | C | 2 |
|          | attacks (GM's choice)                            | * | 3 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Head 1:* The target can't use recoveries until  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | end of its next turn.                            | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Head 2:* One enemy that hit the dragon since    | P | 5 |
|          | the dragon's last turn takes 12 damage.          | D | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Head 3:* The target moves to a nearby           | * |   |
|          | non-harmful location of the dragon's choice as a |   |   |
|          | free action. This movement can provoke           | * |   |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **C: Venom breath +13 vs. PD (1d3 + 1 nearby     | D |   |
|          | enemies)**---35 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Swarming motes:* Each time the dragon uses this |   |   |
|          | attack, a swarm of light motes that resolve into | * |   |
|          | scorpions and stinging insects swirl around the  | * |   |
|          | targets. The swarm harasses each targeted enemy, | H |   |
|          | hit or miss. During its next turn, any enemy     | P |   |
|          | being swarmed this way must choose one: Take 25  | * |   |
|          | damage; OR roll twice for each attack roll it    | * |   |
|          | makes that turn, taking the lower result.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Crying heavens +13    |   |   |
|          | vs. MD (each enemy in the battle)**---20 ongoing |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 ongoing damage.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Temporal manastorm:* The empyrean dragon's      |   |   |
|          | connection to the overworld falters, creating a  |   |   |
|          | storm of distorted time and magic in the area.   |   |   |
|          | The dragon's critical hit range for all attacks  |   |   |
|          | expands by 2 until the end of the battle. In     |   |   |
|          | addition, when a target saves against the        |   |   |
|          | ongoing damage from this attack, the crit range  |   |   |
|          | of its attacks against the dragon expands by 1   |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a free action when   |   |   |
|          | first staggered.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Three heads are better than one:* The empyrean  |   |   |
|          | dragon can make two *gleaming bite* attacks as a |   |   |
|          | single standard action, one each from two heads. |   |   |
|          | The third head is assumed to be maneuvering the  |   |   |
|          | body around. It can choose not to make one of    |   |   |
|          | those attacks to end any condition affecting it  |   |   |
|          | except for ongoing damage (this includes the     |   |   |
|          | stunned condition, even though it technically    |   |   |
|          | doesn't get an action when stunned).             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | An enemy who scores a critical hit against an    |   |   |
|          | empyrean dragon can forego the extra damage to   |   |   |
|          | lop off one of the dragon's heads. If an enemy   |   |   |
|          | deals 150 damage with a single attack against    |   |   |
|          | the dragon, the attack will also remove a head.  |   |   |
|          | An empyrean dragon with two remaining heads can  |   |   |
|          | make only one *gleaming bite* attack as a        |   |   |
|          | standard action and can't sacrifice that attack  |   |   |
|          | to remove conditions. The dragon dies if all     |   |   |
|          | three heads are removed.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* An empyrean dragon can    |   |   |
|          | use *venom breath* 1d2 + 1 times per battle, but |   |   |
|          | never two turns in a row.                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hoard Spirit (Red)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Hoard-fueled strike +14 vs. AC**---35 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck under a pile  | * | 2 |
| Mook     | of treasure until the end of its next turn.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| C        |                                                  | * | 8 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hoardsong Dragon (Red)

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                               | **   | 2 |
|          |                                               | AC** | 5 |
| 9th    | Vulnerability: cold                           |      |   |
| level    |                                               | *    | 2 |
|          | **Fangs and claws +14 vs. AC (3               | *(In | 6 |
| Spoiler  | attacks)**---30 damage                        | Lai  |   |
|          |                                               | r)** | 2 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 15 extra      |      | 4 |
|          | damage from a precise strike.                 | **   |   |
|          |                                               | PD** | 1 |
|          | **C: Hoardsong +14 vs. MD (one nearby enemy   |      | 8 |
|          | in the dragon's lair)**---10 psychic damage,  | **   |   |
|          | and the target is confused (save ends)        | MD** | 3 |
|          |                                               |      | 6 |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle, as a quick action    | **   | 0 |
|          | (once per round).                             | HP** |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | **C: Precise breath +14 vs. PD (1d4 + 1       |      |   |
|          | nearby enemies, or one enemy)**---20 fire     |      |   |
|          | damage, and 10 ongoing fire damage; OR 80     |      |   |
|          | fire damage, and 20 ongoing fire damage if    |      |   |
|          | used against a single enemy                   |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* If the breath targeted         |      |   |
|          | multiple enemies, the target takes 20 ongoing |      |   |
|          | fire damage instead of 10. If the breath      |      |   |
|          | targeted a single enemy, the target takes 40  |      |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage instead of 20.            |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A hoardsong dragon can |      |   |
|          | use *precise breath* 1d4 times per battle,    |      |   |
|          | but never two turns in a row.                 |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Known to an ounce:* The dragon knows where   |      |   |
|          | every treasure in its hoard is located,       |      |   |
|          | allowing it to detect any movement or         |      |   |
|          | shifting of the coins and valuables. While in |      |   |
|          | its lair with its hoard, the hoardsong dragon |      |   |
|          | is immune to invisibility and ignores         |      |   |
|          | illusions, and creatures attempting to hide   |      |   |
|          | from it take a --5 penalty to their checks.   |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets |      |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a       |      |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only     |      |   |
|          | deals half damage.                            |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Hoard minions:* The dragon's connection to   |      |   |
|          | its hoard is so strong that it has some       |      |   |
|          | control over the souls of those it previously |      |   |
|          | killed who owned the treasures. Once per      |      |   |
|          | round as a quick action, the hoardsong dragon |      |   |
|          | can summon 1d4 hoard spirits that take form   |      |   |
|          | by surrounding themselves in coins, wear      |      |   |
|          | empty suits of armor, etc., and defend the    |      |   |
|          | dragon's hoard. Roll initiative for the       |      |   |
|          | minions once and use that count for all       |      |   |
|          | additional minions.                           |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *The call of the hoard:* The connection of a  |      |   |
|          | hoardsong dragon to its hoard imparts the     |      |   |
|          | dragon's magic upon the hoard. Before battle, |      |   |
|          | if the PCs are able to see the hoard while    |      |   |
|          | the dragon speaks to them, each PC that can   |      |   |
|          | hear the dragon must roll a Wisdom check. On  |      |   |
|          | a result of 24 or less, that PC is charmed as |      |   |
|          | per the *charm person* spell and considers    |      |   |
|          | the dragon a friend. On a result of 25--29,   |      |   |
|          | the PC is lulled by the dragon's words and    |      |   |
|          | the sight of the hoard; if combat occurs, the |      |   |
|          | PC will be stunned during their first round.  |      |   |
|          | The dragon will make a suggestion to charmed  |      |   |
|          | PCs to leave and bring it more treasure for   |      |   |
|          | its hoard (while it prepares surprises for    |      |   |
|          | their return). Charmed PCs won't attack the   |      |   |
|          | dragon, but can make a normal save each round |      |   |
|          | in battle to break the charm effect (or every |      |   |
|          | day outside of combat).                       |      |   |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+
|          |                                               |      |   |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+

#### Huge Black Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Claws and bite +14 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---30   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 15 ongoing  | * |   |
|          | acid damage.                                     |   | 2 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          | **C: Acid breath +14 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or       | D | 1 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---50 acid damage, and 15      | * | 0 |
|          | ongoing acid damage                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 4d12 acid damage.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Draconic grace:* At the start of each of the    | M |   |
|          | huge black dragon's turns, roll a d4 to see if   | D |   |
|          | it gets an extra standard action. If the roll is | * |   |
|          | equal to or less than the escalation die, the    | * |   |
|          | black dragon can take an extra standard action   |   |   |
|          | that turn.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | After the first success, the grace die bumps up  | H |   |
|          | to a d6. After the second success, it's a d8,    | P |   |
|          | then a d10 after the third success. The fourth   | * |   |
|          | success is a d12, and finally a d20 after the    | * |   |
|          | fifth one.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A huge black dragon can   |   |   |
|          | use *acid breath* 2d3 times per battle, but      |   |   |
|          | never two turns in a row.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Water-breathing:* Black dragons swim well and   |   |   |
|          | can breathe underwater.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist acid 18+:* When an acid attack targets   |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Huge Bronze Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Crushing bite +14 vs. AC**---170 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can pop free from one  | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | enemy engaged with it.                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Dragon   | **C: Lightning breath +14 vs. PD (1d6 nearby or  | * | 9 |
|          | faraway enemies in a rough line)**---120         | * |   |
|          | lightning damage, and the closest target hit is  | P | 6 |
|          | dazed (save ends)                                | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Inspire awe:* While an enemy has 72 hp or       | * |   |
|          | fewer, it takes a --4 penalty to limited attacks | * |   |
|          | against the dragon.                              | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Resist lightning 18+:* When a lightning attack  | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Retributive lightning:* Once per battle as an   | H |   |
|          | interrupt action when an enemy targets it with   | P |   |
|          | an attack, the dragon can make a lightning       | * |   |
|          | breath against that attacker (and yes, if the    | * |   |
|          | dragon hits, the interrupted attack takes the    |   |   |
|          | --4 penalty due to dazed).                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Rugged defenses:* When a creature attacks the   |   |   |
|          | dragon, if it used another action this turn      |   |   |
|          | before the attack, the dragon gains a +4 bonus   |   |   |
|          | to all defenses against the attack.              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Copper Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Needle-sharp claws and teeth +13 vs. AC (2     | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---50 damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | *First natural 11+ each turn:* The dragon can    | * |   |
|          | make an *acrid smoke* attack as a free action.   |   | 2 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Acrid smoke +14 vs.   | * |   |
|          | PD (up to 3 enemies engaged with the             | P | 2 |
|          | dragon)**---The target is hampered until the end | D | 9 |
|          | of its next turn                                 | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Acid breath +14 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies  |   |   |
|          | in a group)**---25 acid damage, and 25 ongoing   | * |   |
|          | acid damage                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 ongoing acid damage.                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Out-think:* Once per battle as a free action    | * |   |
|          | when an enemy rolls a natural even attack        |   |   |
|          | against the dragon, the dragon negates the       | * |   |
|          | attack (no damage or effects).                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    | P |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Swift mind:* Once per battle as a free action   |   |   |
|          | when an attack targets the dragon's MD, it can   |   |   |
|          | force the attacker to reroll the attack.         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Red Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Fangs, claws, and tail +15 vs. AC (2           | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  | attacks)**---35 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *First natural even hit or miss each turn:* Roll | * | 0 |
|          | a third *fangs, claws, and tail* attack.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 4 |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +15 vs. PD (2d3 nearby         | D | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---40 fire damage                      | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A large red dragon can    | * |   |
|          | use *fiery breath* 1d4 times per battle, but     | M |   |
|          | never two turns in a row.                        | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature,        | * |   |
|          | enemies with 72 hp or fewer are dazed (--4       |   |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     | * |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    | P |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Silver Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Swift, keen claws +14 vs. AC**---95 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can make a *paralyzing  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | smoke* attack as a free action.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Paralyzing smoke +15  | * | 5 |
|          | vs. MD (1d3 enemies engaged with the             | * |   |
|          | dragon)**---The target must roll an immediate    | P | 4 |
|          | save. On a failure, the target can't take any    | D | 3 |
|          | actions and is helpless until the start of the   | * | 0 |
|          | dragon's next turn as its limbs become           | * |   |
|          | paralyzed. On a success, the target is dazed     |   |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Ice breath +14 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies   | M |   |
|          | in a group)**---60 cold damage, and the closest  | D |   |
|          | target hit is dazed until the start of the       | * |   |
|          | dragon's next turn                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Evasive turn:* Once per battle as a free action | H |   |
|          | when an attack targets the dragon, it can force  | P |   |
|          | the attacker to reroll the attack and has        | * |   |
|          | *resist damage 16+* against that attack.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Greathoard Elder (Red)

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +14                               | **   | 2 |
|          |                                               | AC** | 7 |
| 11th   | **Fangs, claws, and wings +16 vs. AC (2       |      |   |
| level    | attacks)**---90 damage                        | *    | 2 |
|          |                                               | *(In | 8 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 14+:* The target takes 12 extra      | Lai  |   |
|          | damage from a wing buffet.                    | r)** | 2 |
| Dragon   |                                               |      | 6 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 20 extra      | **   |   |
|          | damage from a claw strike.                    | PD** | 2 |
|          |                                               |      | 0 |
|          | *Natural 19+:* The dragon can make a          | **   |   |
|          | *treasury master* attack as a free action.    | MD** | 8 |
|          |                                               |      | 7 |
|          | **C: Treasury master +16 vs. MD (the nearby   | **   | 0 |
|          | non-confused enemy with the most true magic   | HP** |   |
|          | items)**---30 psychic damage, and the target  |      |   |
|          | is confused (save ends)                       |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle, as a quick action    |      |   |
|          | (once per round).                             |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | **C: Precise breath +16 vs. PD (1d4 + 1       |      |   |
|          | nearby enemies, or one enemy)**---50 fire     |      |   |
|          | damage, and 15 ongoing fire damage; OR 170    |      |   |
|          | fire damage, and 30 ongoing fire damage if    |      |   |
|          | used against a single enemy                   |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* If the breath targeted         |      |   |
|          | multiple enemies, the target takes 25 ongoing |      |   |
|          | fire damage instead of 15. If the breath      |      |   |
|          | targeted a single enemy, the target takes 60  |      |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage instead of 30.            |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Call of the hoard:* When an enemy is engaged |      |   |
|          | with the greathoard elder in its lair at the  |      |   |
|          | start of its turn, it must roll a normal      |      |   |
|          | save; on a failure, it hurls one random       |      |   |
|          | non-armor true magic item into the dragon's   |      |   |
|          | hoard (adjust stats accordingly). The item is |      |   |
|          | unavailable until the end of the battle. If   |      |   |
|          | the dragon flees or is defeated, lost magic   |      |   |
|          | items can be retrieved.                       |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Greathoard rage:* When an enemy scores a     |      |   |
|          | critical hit against the greathoard elder     |      |   |
|          | while it's in its lair, the elder can reroll  |      |   |
|          | one of its missed attacks each round          |      |   |
|          | (cumulative) as its hoard sings a song of     |      |   |
|          | carnage to it.                                |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A greathoard elder can |      |   |
|          | use *precise breath* 1d4 + 1 times per        |      |   |
|          | battle, but never two turns in a row.         |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets |      |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a       |      |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only     |      |   |
|          | deals half damage.                            |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                |      |   |
|          |                                               |      |   |
|          | *Iconic comparisons:* The dragon is           |      |   |
|          | enamored/envious of the icons with the        |      |   |
|          | greatest hoards. For each PC who has at least |      |   |
|          | one positive or conflicted relationship point |      |   |
|          | with one or more of those icons, the          |      |   |
|          | greathoard elder gains an extra use of        |      |   |
|          | *treasury master* this battle.                |      |   |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+
|          |                                               |      |   |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+------+---+

#### Huge Copper Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | **Needle-sharp claws and teeth +15 vs. AC (2     | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---70 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | *First natural 11+ each turn:* The dragon can    | * |   |
|          | make an *acrid smoke* attack as a free action.   |   | 2 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Acrid smoke +16 vs.   | * |   |
|          | PD (up to 3 enemies engaged with the             | P | 7 |
|          | dragon)**---The target is hampered until the end | D | 0 |
|          | of its next turn                                 | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Acid breath +16 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies  |   |   |
|          | in a group)**---35 acid damage, and 35 ongoing   | * |   |
|          | acid damage                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 ongoing acid damage.                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Inspire awe:* While an enemy has 120 hp or      | * |   |
|          | fewer, it takes a --4 penalty to limited attacks |   |   |
|          | against the dragon.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    | H |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | P |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Supreme Out-think:* Once per battle as a free   |   |   |
|          | action when an enemy rolls a natural even attack |   |   |
|          | against the dragon, the dragon negates the       |   |   |
|          | attack (no damage or effects). In addition, this |   |   |
|          | effect against natural even attacks lasts        |   |   |
|          | against the dragon's enemies until the start of  |   |   |
|          | the dragon's next turn.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Swift mind:* Once per battle as a free action   |   |   |
|          | when an attack targets the dragon's MD, it can   |   |   |
|          | force the attacker to reroll the attack.         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Huge Green Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 11th   | **Sharp claws +16 vs. AC**---100 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 11--15:* The dragon can make a *bite*   | * | 5 |
| Spoiler  | attack as a free action.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *Natural 16+:* The dragon can make a *poison     | * | 0 |
|          | breath* attack as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 9 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +16 vs. AC**---140  | D | 0 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 20 ongoing  |   |   |
|          | poison damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Poison breath +16 vs. | M |   |
|          | PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---100 poison damage,   | D |   |
|          | and the target is hampered (save ends)           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist poison 18+:* When a poison attack        | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | H |   |
|          | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | P |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Large Gold Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | **Ferocious bite +16 vs. AC**---100 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a             | * | 2 |
| Caster   | *stultifying smoke* attack as a free action.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Stultifying smoke +16 | * | 6 |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy engaged with the               | * |   |
|          | dragon)**---The target is stunned until the      | P | 4 |
|          | start of the dragon's next turn                  | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +16 vs. PD (up to 5 nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---70 fire damage           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Spiral of golden flame:* Once per battle as a   | D |   |
|          | quick action while the escalation die is 3+, the | * |   |
|          | dragon can fly into the air, popping free from   | * |   |
|          | all enemies engaged with it, and make a *fiery   |   |   |
|          | breath* attack against each enemy that was       | * |   |
|          | engaged with it.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Indomitability:* Once per battle as a free      | P |   |
|          | action at the start of its turn, the dragon can  | * |   |
|          | cancel all effects and conditions on it,         | * |   |
|          | including ongoing damage. It can cancel these    |   |   |
|          | effects even if it's prevented from taking       |   |   |
|          | actions, such as by being stunned.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Flamewreathed Dragon (Red)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | **Fangs and claws +17 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---75  | A | 21 |
| level    | damage                                           | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 27 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 20 ongoing fire  | * |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   | 11 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 00 |
|          | **C: Primal fire breath +17 vs. PD (1d4 + 1      | * |    |
|          | nearby enemies, or one enemy)**---60 fire        | P |    |
|          | damage, and 15 ongoing fire damage; OR 180 fire  | D |    |
|          | damage, and 30 ongoing fire damage and the       | * |    |
|          | target is weakened (save ends both) if used      | * |    |
|          | against a single enemy                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural 18+:* If the breath targeted multiple   | * |    |
|          | enemies, the target takes 25 ongoing fire damage | M |    |
|          | instead of 15. If the breath targeted a single   | D |    |
|          | enemy, the target takes 60 ongoing fire damage   | * |    |
|          | instead of 30.                                   | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Whirling inferno +17 vs. PD (each nearby    | * |    |
|          | enemy taking ongoing fire damage)**---The        | * |    |
|          | target's ongoing fire damage increases by 5 and  | H |    |
|          | becomes hard save ends (16+) as the dragon fans  | P |    |
|          | the flames                                       | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle, as a quick action (once |   |    |
|          | per round).                                      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A flamewreathed dragon    |   |    |
|          | can use *primal fire* breath 1d4 + 2 times per   |   |    |
|          | battle, but never two turns in a row.            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |    |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Wyrm of fear and flame:* While engaged with     |   |    |
|          | this creature, enemies with 120 hp or fewer are  |   |    |
|          | dazed (--4 attacks), do not add the escalation   |   |    |
|          | die to their attacks, and take 4d20 fire damage  |   |    |
|          | at the start of their turn.                      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Draconic fire:* The dragon's will and magic are |   |    |
|          | so powerful that it ignores the fire resistance  |   |    |
|          | of creatures battling it.                        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Smoke minions:* The dragon's lair is wreathed   |   |    |
|          | in smoke and fumes, and through its magic the    |   |    |
|          | dragon has some control over those hot gases.    |   |    |
|          | Once per round as a quick action, the            |   |    |
|          | flamewreathed dragon can summon 1d4 smoke        |   |    |
|          | minions that take humanoid or bestial form and   |   |    |
|          | defend the dragon's lair. Roll initiative for    |   |    |
|          | the minions once and use that count for all      |   |    |
|          | additional minions.                              |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Huge Blue Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 12th   | **Double claws +16 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---50     | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit or miss:* The dragon can make  | * |   |
|          | a *bite* attack as a free action.                |   | 2 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +16 vs. AC**---60   | * |   |
|          | damage, and 4d10 lightning damage to the target  | P | 9 |
|          | and to one other nearby enemy of the dragon's    | D | 8 |
|          | choice                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Far slashing lightning breath +16 vs. PD    |   |   |
|          | (1d4 nearby or faraway enemies)**---80 lightning | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is also dazed     | D |   |
|          | (save ends). After the target saves, it takes a  | * |   |
|          | --1 attack penalty (non-cumulative) until its    | * |   |
|          | next full heal-up.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A huge blue dragon can    | * |   |
|          | use *far slashing lightning breath* 2d4 times    | H |   |
|          | per battle, but never two turns in a row.        | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Counter-spell:* When an enemy targets the blue  | * |   |
|          | dragon with a spell, the dragon can roll a save; |   |   |
|          | success means the spell has no effect on the     |   |   |
|          | dragon. If the level of the spell is lower than  |   |   |
|          | the dragon's level, it's a normal save (11+).    |   |   |
|          | Against an equal or higher-level spell, the save |   |   |
|          | is a hard save (16+). If the dragon is           |   |   |
|          | staggered, the save target increases by +5       |   |   |
|          | (normal becomes hard, hard becomes 21+:          |   |   |
|          | impossible unless the dragon has a save bonus    |   |   |
|          | from some other source).                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist lightning 18+:* When a lightning attack  |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Smoke Minions

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 12th    | **Invasive gases +17 vs. AC**---55 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is hampered from        | * | 0 |
| Mook      | burning eyes and gases in its lungs until the end | * |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 |   | 2 |
| Construct |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Huge Red Dragon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +19                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 13th   | **Fangs, claws, and tail +19 vs. AC (3           | A | 27 |
| level    | attacks)**---70 damage                           | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 23 |
| Wrecker  | *First natural even hit or miss each turn:* Roll | * |    |
|          | a fourth *fangs, claws, and tail* attack.        |   | 12 |
| Dragon   |                                                  | * | 00 |
|          | *Second natural even hit or miss each turn:*     | * |    |
|          | Roll a fifth *fangs, claws, and tail* attack.    | P |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | **C: Fiery breath+19 vs. PD (2d3 nearby or       | * |    |
|          | faraway enemies)**---80 fire damage              | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* A huge red dragon can use | M |    |
|          | *fiery breath* 1d6 times per battle, but never   | D |    |
|          | two turns in a row.                              | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature,        |   |    |
|          | enemies with 144 hp or fewer are dazed (--4      | * |    |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     | * |    |
|          | their attacks.                                   | H |    |
|          |                                                  | P |    |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    | * |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |    |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Huge Silver Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 13th   | **Swift, keen claws +17 vs. AC**---230 damage    | A | 24 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | *Natural 6+:* The dragon can make a *paralyzing  | * | 28 |
| Spoiler  | smoke* attack as a free action.                  | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 13 |
| Dragon   | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Paralyzing smoke +18  | * | 00 |
|          | vs. MD (1d3 enemies engaged with the             | * |    |
|          | dragon)**---The target must roll an immediate    | P |    |
|          | save. On a failure, the target can't take any    | D |    |
|          | actions and is helpless until the start of the   | * |    |
|          | dragon's next turn as its limbs become           | * |    |
|          | paralyzed. On a success, the target is dazed     |   |    |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **C: Ice breath +18 vs. PD (1d4 enemies in a     | M |    |
|          | group)**---160 cold damage, and the closest      | D |    |
|          | target hit is dazed until the start of the       | * |    |
|          | dragon's next turn                               | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Evasive riposte:* Once per battle as a free     | H |    |
|          | action when an attack targets the dragon, it can | P |    |
|          | force the attacker to reroll the attack and has  | * |    |
|          | *resist damage 18+* against that attack. If the  | * |    |
|          | attack misses, the dragon can make a *paralyzing |   |    |
|          | smoke* attack as free action.                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Inspire awe:* While an enemy has 192 hp or      |   |    |
|          | fewer, it takes a --4 penalty to limited attacks |   |    |
|          | against the dragon.                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist cold 18+:* When a cold attack targets    |   |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |    |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Huge Gold Dragon (Metallic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 29 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 14th   | **Ferocious bite +19 vs. AC**---240 damage       | A | 25 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | *Natural 11+:* The dragon can make a             | * | 29 |
| Caster   | *stultifying smoke* attack as a free action.     | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 14 |
| Dragon   | *Miss:* 120 damage.                              | * | 00 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Stultifying smoke +19 | P |    |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy engaged with the               | D |    |
|          | dragon)**---The target is stunned until the      | * |    |
|          | start of the dragon's next turn                  | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +19 vs. PD (up to 5 enemies in | * |    |
|          | a group)**---200 fire damage                     | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 40 ongoing  | D |    |
|          | fire damage and is dazed (save ends both).       | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Inspire awe:* While an enemy has 240 hp or      | * |    |
|          | fewer, it takes a --4 penalty to limited attacks | H |    |
|          | against the dragon.                              | P |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Spiral of golden flame:* Once per battle as a   | * |    |
|          | quick action while the escalation die is 3+, the |   |    |
|          | dragon can fly into the air, popping free from   |   |    |
|          | all enemies engaged with it, and make a fiery    |   |    |
|          | breath attack against each enemy that was        |   |    |
|          | engaged with it.                                 |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Indomitability:* Once per battle as a free      |   |    |
|          | action at the start of its turn, the dragon can  |   |    |
|          | heal 300 hp and cancel all effects and           |   |    |
|          | conditions on it, including ongoing damage. It   |   |    |
|          | can heal and cancel these effects even if it's   |   |    |
|          | prevented from taking actions, such as by being  |   |    |
|          | stunned.                                         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |    |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |    |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |    |
|          | damage.                                          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Dragon, The Purple

[Standard Abilities]{.underline}

Rather than repeat these for each entry the following abilities are
standard for the Purple Dragon.

*Escalator:* The Purple Dragon adds the escalation die to their attacks.

*Shape-shifter supreme:* The Purple Dragon can choose to be in its human
form or its dragon form. Switching forms is a move action. Though their
dragon form is huge, their human form is regular size, and other forms
are whatever size is appropriate to that form. By epic tier the Purple
Dragon can conceivably take any form, but regardless of tier their
vanity limits her to forms that feature purple and magenta (purple
clothes and magenta hair, purple scales and magenta wing membranes,
etc.).

*\[Adventurer and champion tier non-ally only\] Cunning escapes:* When
the Purple Dragon drops to 0 hp or fewer (or would otherwise die) they
are not slain, but instead escapes leaving an illusion in their place.
When they escape it is a campaign win for the party, as though they had
been killed, and their plans crumble. The Purple Dragon cannot return
until the next tier (if defeated at adventurer tier they cannot return
until champion tier, if defeated at champion tier they return at epic
tier).

*\[Once per battle, in human form only\] "No, they're the real Purple
Dragon, shoot them!":* As a quick action at the end of one of their
turns, the Purple Dragon uses their powers of illusion and mind-control
to make one of their attackers (usually the closest one to them) look
and sound like them; the next attack against the Purple Dragon has a 50%
chance of being targeted against the wrong target. Once the next attack
is made, the illusion vanishes.

*Flight:* In their dragon form the Purple Dragon can fly. The Purple
Dragon can also fly using magic, but prefers to not do so unless they
need to fight a flying enemy.

*Illusionary soiree:* Each round roll a d6 (or a d4 if the fight is at a
party or a luxurious lair), if it is equal to or less than the
escalation die it has the following effect.

**1: Sparkling lights**---Ranged attacks against the Purple Dragon or
their allies have a -2 penalty.

**2-3: Kaleidoscopic kinescope**---Any attacks against the Purple Dragon
this round that are natural 1s are rerolled against the nearest ally of
the attacker (or against the attacker themselves if there is no other
possible target).

**4+: Illusionary terrain**---Any of the Purple Dragon's enemies that
move this round must roll a save, on a failure they end up in a place
they did not intend.

[Nastier Specials]{.underline}

*"You've got the wrong person":* The Purple Dragon's *"No, they're the
real Purple Dragon, shoot them!"* ability lingers long after the battle,
maybe for days. This is probably deliberate magic on their part, because
when they skip town the party member that looks and sounds like them
will take the fall (or at least create enough confusion for them to make
good their escape).

*\[Epic tier only\] Not dead yet:* The Purple Dragon gets one last
*cunning escape* at epic tier, and though their plans are ruined by
their defeat they'll return one last time to exact their vengeance upon
the party.

#### The Purple Dragon (Adventurer)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | *Standard abilities: Shape-shifter supreme,      | A |   |
| level    | cunning escapes, "No, they're the real Purple    | C | 1 |
|          | dragon, shoot them!", flight, illusionary        | * | 8 |
| Caster   | soiree.*                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | [Human form]{.underline}                         | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Bladed fan +10 vs. AC**---25 damage            | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Make a second        | * | 0 |
|          | *bladed fan* attack, and if that is a natural    | * |   |
|          | even roll make a third *bladed fan* attack.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target is blown back from | * |   |
|          | the Purple Dragon.                               | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* The Purple Dragon pops free  | * |   |
|          | and moves away from the target (blown by the     | * |   |
|          | wind of the fan).                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Bedazzling deceptions +9 vs. MD (1d3 nearby | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---10 psychic damage and 10 ongoing    | H |   |
|          | psychic damage                                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit against a target already taking ongoing    | * |   |
|          | psychic damage:* The target must start making    |   |   |
|          | last gasp saves, if they fail they believe that  |   |   |
|          | they are the Purple Dragon. Removing this        |   |   |
|          | delusion from the target's mind is as difficult  |   |   |
|          | as turning a petrified character back from stone |   |   |
|          | (hard, but not impossible).                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 7 psychic damage.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\] "No, they're the real       |   |   |
|          | Purple Dragon, shoot them":* The Purple Dragon   |   |   |
|          | uses their powers of illusion and mind-control   |   |   |
|          | to make one of their attackers look and sound    |   |   |
|          | like them; the next attack has a 50% chance of   |   |   |
|          | being targeted against the wrong target.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Dragon form]{.underline}                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Painted claws +9 vs. AC**---40 damage          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 14 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Psychoactive breath +9 vs. MD (1d4 nearby   |   |   |
|          | enemies, or 1d3 faraway enemies in a             |   |   |
|          | group)**---25 psychic damage                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is also dazed     |   |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* The Purple Dragon can use |   |   |
|          | their psychoactive breath 2d4 times each combat  |   |   |
|          | but never two turns in a row. They can also      |   |   |
|          | choose to make their targets confused (save      |   |   |
|          | ends) on a hit or miss with their *psychoactive  |   |   |
|          | breath*, but that uses up their breath for the   |   |   |
|          | rest of the battle.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wing buffet:* That *bladed fan* attack? Yeah,   |   |   |
|          | that was the Purple Dragon's wings hidden by an  |   |   |
|          | illusion. The Purple Dragon can use the *bladed  |   |   |
|          | fan* attack in this form, but now it is clear    |   |   |
|          | that they are using their wings so it is only +9 |   |   |
|          | to attack.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\] Cloak of illusion:* As a    |   |   |
|          | quick action the Purple Dragon fills the         |   |   |
|          | battlefield with illusions that give enemies     |   |   |
|          | attacking them a -2 penalty to their attacks.    |   |   |
|          | This lasts until they next attack.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### The Purple Dragon (Champion)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | *Standard abilities: Shape-shifter supreme,      | A |   |
| level    | cunning escapes, "No, they're the real Purple    | C | 2 |
|          | dragon, shoot them!", flight, illusionary        | * | 2 |
| Caster   | soiree.*                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Dragon   | [Human form]{.underline}                         | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Bladed fan +14 vs. AC**---68 damage            | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Make a second        | * | 0 |
|          | *bladed fan* attack, and if that is a natural    | * |   |
|          | even roll make a third *bladed fan* attack.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target is blown back from | * |   |
|          | the Purple Dragon.                               | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* The Purple Dragon pops free  | * |   |
|          | and moves away from the target (blown by the     | * |   |
|          | wind of the fan).                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Mirrorball burst +13 vs. MD (1d4 nearby or  | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies)**---35 damage and 30 ongoing    | H |   |
|          | psychic damage                                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Target fails a save against the ongoing         | * |   |
|          | damage:* The target is dazzled by light and      |   |   |
|          | takes a cumulative -1 penalty to attacks (up to  |   |   |
|          | a maximum of -4) until the end of the battle.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Dragon form]{.underline}                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Gilded claws +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---50     |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 28 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Psychoactive breath +13 vs. MD (1d4 nearby  |   |   |
|          | enemies, or 1d3 faraway enemies in a             |   |   |
|          | group)**---40 psychic damage and 10 ongoing      |   |   |
|          | psychic damage                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit, once per target per battle:*  |   |   |
|          | The target is also dazed and stuck (save once    |   |   |
|          | for both effects and the ongoing damage).        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Once the target saves against the |   |   |
|          | ongoing damage if the save was a natural odd     |   |   |
|          | roll the target is dazed (save ends).            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* The Purple Dragon can use |   |   |
|          | their *psychoactive breath* 2d4 times each       |   |   |
|          | combat but never two turns in a row. They can    |   |   |
|          | choose to make their targets confused (save      |   |   |
|          | ends) on a hit or miss with their *psychoactive  |   |   |
|          | breath*, but that uses up their breath for the   |   |   |
|          | rest of the battle.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wing buffet:* Just like adventurer tier, the    |   |   |
|          | *bladed fan* attack translates in dragon form to |   |   |
|          | wing buffet but with only +13 to attack.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\] Cloak of illusion:* As a    |   |   |
|          | quick action the Purple Dragon fills the         |   |   |
|          | battlefield with illusions that give enemies     |   |   |
|          | attacking them a -2 penalty to their attacks.    |   |   |
|          | This lasts until they next attack.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### The Purple Dragon (Epic)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | *Standard abilities: Shape-shifter supreme, "No, | A | 26 |
| level    | they're the real Purple dragon, shoot them!",    | C |    |
|          | flight, illusionary soiree. Perhaps also not     | * | 28 |
| Caster   | dead yet.*                                       | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 11 |
| Dragon   | [Human form]{.underline}                         | * | 00 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **Bladed fan +18 vs. AC**---160 damage           | P |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Make a second        | * |    |
|          | *bladed fan* attack, and if that is a natural    | * |    |
|          | even roll make a third *bladed fan* attack.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target is blown back from | * |    |
|          | the Purple Dragon.                               | M |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* The Purple Dragon pops free  | * |    |
|          | and moves away from the target (blown by the     | * |    |
|          | wind of the fan).                                |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **C: One thousand delights +17 vs. MD (1d4       | * |    |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies)**---Target is stuck   | H |    |
|          | until the start of their next turn as their mind | P |    |
|          | is assailed by pleasant images pulled from their | * |    |
|          | own inner fantasies                              | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is confused (save     |   |    |
|          | ends).                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* Target is weakened (save      |   |    |
|          | ends).                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Once the target saves against     |   |    |
|          | weakened or confused they take 100 psychic       |   |    |
|          | damage for each failed save against the effect   |   |    |
|          | before they successfully passed the save.        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Dragon form]{.underline}                        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Filigree-gilded claws +17 vs. AC (4            |   |    |
|          | attacks)**---55 damage                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* 30 damage.                               |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Psychoactive breath +17 vs. MD (1d4 nearby  |   |    |
|          | enemies, or 1d3 faraway enemies in a             |   |    |
|          | group)**---60 psychic damage and 50 ongoing      |   |    |
|          | psychic damage                                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural even hit, once per target per battle:*  |   |    |
|          | The target is also weakened and stuck (save once |   |    |
|          | for both effects and the ongoing damage).        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Once the target saves against the |   |    |
|          | ongoing damage if the save was a natural odd     |   |    |
|          | roll the target is weakened (save ends).         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Intermittent breath:* The Purple Dragon can use |   |    |
|          | their *psychoactive breath* 2d4 times each       |   |    |
|          | combat but never two turns in a row. They can    |   |    |
|          | choose to make their targets confused (save      |   |    |
|          | ends) on a hit or miss with their *psychoactive  |   |    |
|          | breath*, but that uses up their breath for the   |   |    |
|          | rest of the battle.                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Wing buffet:* Just like the previous tiers, the |   |    |
|          | *bladed fan* attack translates in dragon form to |   |    |
|          | wing buffet but with only +17 to attack.         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | \[Once per battle\] Invisibility: As a quick     |   |    |
|          | action the Purple Dragon becomes invisible until |   |    |
|          | they next attack. Characters attacking the       |   |    |
|          | Purple Dragon 'blind' have a 50% miss chance     |   |    |
|          | before rolling their attack.                     |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Drider

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Sword or mace +9 vs. AC**---20 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The drider can make a        | * | 5 |
| Caster   | *poison bite* attack as a free action.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Ab       | *\[Special trigger\]* **Poison bite +9 vs.       | * | 0 |
| erration | PD**---10 poison damage, and 10 ongoing poison   | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | **R: Lightning bolt spell +11 vs. PD**---30      | * | 0 |
|          | lightning damage                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The drider can make a        | * |   |
|          | *lightning bolt spell* attack against a second   | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy, followed by a third and final      | M |   |
|          | different nearby enemy if the second attack is   | D |   |
|          | also a natural even hit.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Web attack +11 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby       |   |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---The target is hampered   | * |   |
|          | (save ends)                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round as a quick action, if the | P |   |
|          | escalation die is even.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Drow

Drow may optionally include one of these abilities as nastier specials:
*Drow Cruelty* or *Poisons and Potions*.

[Drow Cruelty]{.underline}

Choose one of the following abilities for all non-mook drow in a battle
to have:

*Poisoner:* When the drow scores a critical hit, it can forego damage to
force the target to start making last gasp saves. On the fourth failure,
the target falls unconscious (and can't be woken normally) for 2d4
minutes.

*Take advantage of weakness:* Whenever an enemy nearby a drow rolls a
save, it takes its level in damage.

*Umbral caul:* As long as at least one drow uses a standard action each
round to maintain the supernatural darkness, each non-drow creature in
the battle becomes dazed (save ends) whenever it rolls a natural 1--5
with an attack roll.

*Venomous:* The first time each battle a drow hits with a weapon attack,
the target also takes 5 ongoing poison damage.

[Poisons and Potions]{.underline}

Drinking a potion, applying a poison, or using a substance requires only
a quick action for a drow with one of these options. Characters who
acquire any of these drow items must use a standard action to
drink/apply them.

*Draft of Eschaton* (potion): When drunk it immediately purges the body
of all poisons and toxins and ends any ongoing conditions. All the
drinker's saves (including last gasp saves and death saves)
automatically succeed for the rest of the battle or for five minutes.
Immediately after the battle, the drinker must make a DC 30 Constitution
check or be completely debilitated and unable to travel far or to fight
for a day.

*Dragon Apples:* Small ceramic spheres that explode. Make a basic ranged
attack against a nearby enemy (or level + 5 for drow); on a hit, the
target takes 10 ongoing fire damage.

*Midnight Tincture:* When this glass vial is broken, the nearby area is
shrouded in clinging darkness. The darkness lasts 3 rounds. Each
creature in the darkness except drow takes a --4 attack penalty. The
tincture can be attached to an arrow or bolt.

*Potion of Spider Climbing:* For one battle or five minutes the drinker
can climb on ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.

*Spider Venom:* A creature hit by a melee weapon coated in the venom
takes 5 ongoing poison damage when the attack roll is a natural 16+.

*Web Dust:* Made from desiccated spiders, this dust can hold a door shut
or stick an object to a wall for five minutes. Champion-tier creatures
can make a DC 20 skill check to rip through something held by *web dust*
before it fully dissolves, and epic-tier creatures can rip through such
objects in a round. Further applications increase the effectiveness:
three applications lasts for fifteen minutes, requires 3 successful
checks, and takes 3 rounds for epic-tier characters to get through.

#### Drow Spider-Mage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Sharpened wand +8 vs. AC**---10 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Shadowfire +8 vs. PD (one nearby or faraway  | * | 3 |
| Caster    | enemy)**---8 damage, and the target is weakened   | * |   |
|           | (save ends)                                       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | *Limited use:* Once the spider-mage hits with     | * |   |
|           | *shadowfire*, she can't use it again until the    | P | 4 |
|           | target saves against it.                          | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Malediction of webs +8 vs. PD (up to 2       | * |   |
|           | nearby enemies in a group)**---The target is      |   |   |
|           | stuck (save ends), and takes 5 damage each time   | * |   |
|           | it fails the save                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Dark orison:* Each time the spider-mage misses   | D |   |
|           | with an attack, the crit range of attacks by drow | * |   |
|           | and spiders in the battle expands by 1.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Spider speaker:* The first time each battle an   | * |   |
|           | enemy hits the spider-mage with a melee attack,   | * |   |
|           | that attacker takes 8 ongoing poison damage from  | H |   |
|           | her familiar.                                     | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Weaver Swarm

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **A thousand needle wounds +8 vs. AC**---5 damage | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is hampered until the   | * | 7 |
| Mook      | end of its next turn.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural 18+:* As above, and the target is also   | * | 3 |
|           | stuck until the end of its next turn.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | *Clinging:* Enemies take a --5 penalty to         | D | 0 |
|           | disengage checks against the swarm.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* The swarm can climb on ceilings   |   |   |
|           | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drow Soldier

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Paired swords +9 vs. AC**---6 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Crossbow +9 vs. AC (one nearby enemy, or a   | * | 9 |
| Mook      | faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---7 damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *With my dying breath I curse at thee:* When the  | * | 4 |
|           | drow soldier drops to 0 hp, one enemy engaged     | * |   |
|           | with it takes 2 poison damage before the drow     | P | 1 |
|           | soldier dies.                                     | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drow Sword Maiden

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Cruel cutlass +10 vs. AC**---18 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Dagger dance +10 vs. AC (one nearby enemy,   | * | 9 |
| Troop     | or a faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---14 damage      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even hit:* Each other enemy engaged with | * | 5 |
|           | the sword maiden takes 10 damage.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Effortless grace:* Once per round when an attack | * |   |
|           | misses the sword maiden, she can move or make a   |   |   |
|           | *cruel cutlass* attack as a free action.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Arcane warrior:* The sword maiden has a true     | M |   |
|           | magic item (probably a weapon) and uses it to her | D |   |
|           | benefit (adjust stats accordingly).               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lokkris

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +16                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Stingers on each leg +11 vs. AC**---8 damage,   | A |   |
| level     | and 5 ongoing poison damage                       | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| Mook      | *Lays eggs in your eyes!:* Each time the lokkris  | * |   |
|           | hits with the attack, the crit range for all      |   | 1 |
| Beast     | lokkris against that target expands by 1 until    | * | 4 |
|           | the end of the battle.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Flight:* Lokkris are quick darting fliers that   | D | 3 |
|           | move with an angry buzzing sound.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A lokkris can climb on ceilings   |   |   |
|           | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drow Spider-Sorceress

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Sharpened wand +11 vs. AC**---20 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Darkfire +11 vs. PD (one nearby or faraway   | * | 6 |
| Caster    | enemy)**---20 damage, and the target is weakened  | * |   |
|           | (save ends)                                       |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Limited use:* Once the sorceress hits with       | * |   |
|           | *darkfire*, she can't use it again until the      | P | 8 |
|           | target saves.                                     | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Greater malediction of webs +11 vs. PD (up   | * |   |
|           | to 2 nearby enemies in a group)**---10 damage,    |   |   |
|           | and the target is stuck (save ends) and takes 10  | * |   |
|           | damage each time it fails the save                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Dark orison:* Each time the spider-sorceress     | D |   |
|           | misses with an attack, the crit range of attacks  | * |   |
|           | by drow and spiders in the battle expands by 1.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Spider speaker:* The first time each battle an   | * |   |
|           | enemy hits the spider-sorceress with a melee      | * |   |
|           | attack, that attacker takes 16 ongoing poison     | H |   |
|           | damage from her familiar.                         | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Arcane arachnids:* The spider-sorceress has a    |   |   |
|           | true magic item (probably an implement) and uses  |   |   |
|           | it to her benefit (adjust stats accordingly).     |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Spider Mount

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +15 (or same as rider if it has one)  | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Bite +11 vs. AC**---15 damage, and 10 ongoing   | A |   |
| level     | poison damage                                     | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Troop     | **C: Web +11 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby enemies in a  | * |   |
|           | group)**---The target is stuck (save ends)        |   | 2 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A spider mount can climb on       | * |   |
|           | ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the   | P | 9 |
|           | ground, and so can its rider.                     | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Uncontrolled:* A riderless spider mount will     | * |   |
|           | eventually run away. At the start of the spider's |   |   |
|           | turn roll a d4; if you roll less than the         | * |   |
|           | escalation die, the mount flees.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drow Darkbolt

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Dagger and spidersilk line +12 vs. AC (one     | A |   |
| level    | nearby enemy)**---22 damage                      | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Archer   | *Miss:* 8 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | **R: Exsanguinating barbed arrows +12 vs. AC     | * | 7 |
|          | (one nearby or faraway enemy)**---20 damage, and | * |   |
|          | 6 ongoing damage                                 | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* As a free action, the        | * | 0 |
|          | darkbolt can make a second *barbed arrows*       | * |   |
|          | attack against a different enemy with a --2      |   |   |
|          | attack penalty. If it gets another natural even  | * |   |
|          | hit, it can make a third (and final) *barbed     | * |   |
|          | arrows* attack against a different enemy with a  | M |   |
|          | --4 attack penalty as a free action.             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Darkbolt vanish!:* If unengaged, when the       | * |   |
|          | darkbolt attacks and rolls a natural even miss,  |   |   |
|          | it can step into a shadow-dimension that turn as | * |   |
|          | a move action. While in the shadows, it can't be | * |   |
|          | seen or targeted with attacks, and it reappears  | H |   |
|          | anywhere nearby at the start of its next turn.   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Wall-crawler:* A darkbolt can climb on ceilings | * |   |
|          | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground    |   |   |
|          | thanks to its rope-dagger and spiked bracers.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Well equipped:* The drow has a potion or poison |   |   |
|          | that it can use as a quick action twice this     |   |   |
|          | battle (see Drow Abilities).                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drow Cavalry

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Glass-tipped lance +14 vs. AC**---75 (90/25)   | A |   |
| level    | damage, and the target pops free from the        | C | 2 |
|          | cavalry and is weakened (save ends)              | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, during a surprise round |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | or the first round of battle.                    | * | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Spider saber +14 vs. AC**---75 (90/25) damage  | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | *Expert spider-rider:* While mounted, the drow   | * | 0 |
|          | cavalry deals +15 damage with its attacks, hit   | * |   |
|          | or miss, against unmounted enemies.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Mounted combatant:* Reduce the drow cavalry's   | * |   |
|          | attack damage by 50 when it's not riding a       | M |   |
|          | spider.                                          | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Spider mount:* Whenever the drow cavalry rolls  | * |   |
|          | a natural 1--10 on an attack roll, its spider    |   |   |
|          | mount acts independently, choosing one of the    | * |   |
|          | following options:                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | **Bite**---The spider makes a *bite* attack.     | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Jump & Scuttle**---The spider and its rider    | * |   |
|          | pop free from all enemies and can move somewhere |   |   |
|          | nearby.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Web**---The spider makes a *web* attack.       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### The Ebon Gauntlet

#### Ebon Gauntlet Sword

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Echoing blade +9 vs. AC**---12 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* A duplicate of the Ebon       | * | 7 |
| Troop     | Gauntlet sword appears next to another nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemy and makes an identical echoing blade attack |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | against that target. This effect can only occur   | * | 7 |
|           | once per turn. After the second attack, choose    | * |   |
|           | which Ebon Gauntlet sword remains on the          | P | 5 |
|           | battlefield and which \*pops\* away with an echo  | D | 2 |
|           | of crashing iron. (The sword's hit points and     | * |   |
|           | conditions aren't affected.)                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ebon Gauntlet Adjudicator

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Blade of adjudication +10 vs. AC**---30 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The adjudicator can make an  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | *echo of decay* attack as a free action.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | **C: Echo of decay +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby        | * | 8 |
|          | enemies)**---10 ongoing negative energy; every   | * |   |
|          | time the target suffers the damage, normal       | P | 1 |
|          | plants and animals next to the target wither or  | D | 3 |
|          | die                                              | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Trollish regeneration 10:* While an adjudicator |   |   |
|          | is damaged, its glyphed flesh heals 10 hit       | * |   |
|          | points at the start of the adjudicator's turn.   | * |   |
|          | It can regenerate five times per battle. If it   | M |   |
|          | heals to its maximum hit points, then that use   | D |   |
|          | of regeneration doesn't count against the        | * |   |
|          | five-use limit. When the adjudicator is hit by   | * |   |
|          | an attack that deals acid or force damage, it    |   |   |
|          | loses one use of its regeneration, and it can't  | * |   |
|          | regenerate during its next turn. Dropping an     | * |   |
|          | adjudicator to 0 hp doesn't kill it if it has    | H |   |
|          | any uses of regeneration left.                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear of the Echo:* Nearby enemies of the        |   |   |
|          | adjudicator are vulnerable to all attacks.       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ebon Gauntlet Eye

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | **Touch of pain +11 vs. PD**---10 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Add the escalation die to the | * | 8 |
| Caster    | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Mind spike +11 vs. MD (one nearby or faraway | * | 0 |
|           | enemy)**---21 psychic damage                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target takes a --4        | D | 8 |
|           | penalty to all its defenses until the end of the  | * |   |
|           | eye's next turn.                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **R: Echo of nightmares +11 vs. MD (1d3 nearby or | * |   |
|           | faraway enemies)**---20 psychic damage, and the   | * |   |
|           | target is hampered and dazed (save ends both);    | M |   |
|           | the target can remove these conditions by taking  | D |   |
|           | an additional 10 psychic damage and allowing one  | * |   |
|           | of its most terrible memories to ripple through   | * |   |
|           | its nearby allies, dealing 1 psychic damage to    |   |   |
|           | each nearby ally                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle after the Ebon Gauntlet   | H |   |
|           | eye has hit with at least one mind spike attack.  | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Gray shift:* Once per hit it has scored this     | * |   |
|           | battle, as a move action, the eye can teleport to |   |   |
|           | any nearby location it can see.                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Echo fade:* Once per battle, as an interrupt     |   |   |
|           | action, the eye can gain *resist damage 18+*      |   |   |
|           | against attacks that target AC or PD. The         |   |   |
|           | resistance ends when the eye makes an attack.     |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gauntlet's Mascot

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 6th     | **Raking claws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Blocker   | *Natural even hit:* Target takes a cumulative --2 | * |   |
|           | penalty to disengage checks until the end of the  |   | 2 |
| Beast?    | battle.                                           | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
| Demon?    |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
| Humanoid? |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ebon Gauntlet Inquisitor

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 7th    | **Rune dagger +12 vs. AC**---28 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is weakened (save | * | 8 |
| Leader   | ends).                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **C: Judgment of the Zealous Icon +12 vs. MD     | * | 1 |
|          | (one or two nearby or faraway enemies)**---28    | * |   |
|          | psychic damage                                   | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 9 |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target lies prostrate in  | * | 0 |
|          | front of the inquisitor until the beginning of   | * |   |
|          | their next turn. While in this position, enemies |   |   |
|          | gain a +4 attack bonus against the target.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Call to action:* Once a round, as a quick       | M |   |
|          | action, the inquisitor can spur a nearby ally    | D |   |
|          | into making an at-will attack as a free action.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The inquisitor sits upon a flying      |   |   |
|          | throne. As a rule, it can't fly extremely high,  | * |   |
|          | but it can usually fly just a little faster than | * |   |
|          | a victim can run.                                | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Vision of the Echo +12 vs. MD (1 nearby or  |   |   |
|          | faraway target)**---56 psychic damage, and the   |   |   |
|          | target is stunned until the beginning of the     |   |   |
|          | inquisitor's next turn. At the end of the        |   |   |
|          | battle, the target must roll a normal save; if   |   |   |
|          | it fails, it ages one year                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Greater Ebon Gauntlet Sword

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Echoing blade +12 vs. AC**---23 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* A duplicate of the greater   | * | 0 |
| Troop    | Ebon Gauntlet sword appears next to another      | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy and makes an identical echoing      |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | blade attack against that target. This effect    | * | 0 |
|          | can only occur once per turn. After the second   | * |   |
|          | attack, choose which greater Ebon Gauntlet sword | P | 1 |
|          | remains on the battlefield and which \*pops\*    | D | 0 |
|          | away with an echo of crashing iron. (The sword's | * | 2 |
|          | hit points and conditions aren't affected.)      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Eidolon

As a free action each round, an eidolon can use one of the three
following abilities, which to them are as natural as breathing is to
mortals. (GMs, due to these special abilities, eidolons are especially
deadly when they have allies.) When including eidolons in battles, you
don't need to (and probably shouldn't!) use these abilities all the
time; they're better as a nasty surprise.

*Split reality:* The eidolon splits the party into different realities.
Each player rolls a d4 for their character. That PC can only perceive
and interact with the eidolon and with other characters who rolled the
same number. That means PCs in different realities can't communicate or
affect each other in any way. For the rest of the battle, each player
rolls a d4 at the start of the round to see which reality their
character is now in. At the start of each round, the eidolon can choose
which version(s) of reality its allies are in.

*Warp time:* At the start of each round two combatants swap places in
the initiative order as determined by the eidolon. Alternately, the
eidolon warps the momentum of the battle and the escalation die value is
determined at the start of the round with a d6 roll.

*Reshuffle space:* The eidolon swaps the position of two creatures in
the battle at the start of the round. Alternately, if you are using
minis and some sort of map tiles you can rearrange the tiles with the
minis still on them.

Finally, all eidolons have the following ability, which plays well with
the "recurring enemy" story.

*Undying:* When an eidolon drops to 0 hp it becomes discorporate. The
eidolon isn't dead, just gone. It has lost its link to or focus upon the
time and place where the adventurers are. If adventurers drive off an
eidolon repeatedly it will probably just stay away. Eidolons can be
vindictive and hold grudges, but they have many possible worlds to
interact with and if a mortal proves too troublesome the eidolon will
move on. In general eidolons need defeating on three separate occasions
to convince them to stay away forever.

#### Eidolon in Humanoid Form

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×        | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Dark-matter fist +6 vs. AC**---15 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Choose a damage type for the  | * | 5 |
| Troop     | attack: acid, cold, fire, lightning, poison, or   | * |   |
|           | thunder.                                          |   | 1 |
| Spirit    |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* Choose a damage type for the   | * |   |
|           | attack: force, holy, negative energy, or psychic. | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 1 |
|           | **R: Mind-shattering whisper +6 vs. MD (one       | * |   |
|           | nearby or faraway enemy)**---15 psychic damage    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 psychic damage.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Transreality tendrils +6 vs. PD (up to 2     | M |   |
|           | nearby or faraway enemies)**---8 negative energy  | D |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Attached Eidolon

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Sharp claws, sharper teeth +8 vs. AC**---10     | A |   |
| level     | holy damage                                       | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Troop     | **C: Long tongue +8 vs. AC (1d3 nearby or faraway | * |   |
|           | enemies in a group)**---3 ongoing acid and holy   |   | 1 |
| Spirit    | damage                                            | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Change shape:* An attached eidolon can look like | P | 4 |
|           | any medium- or small-sized normal beast or        | D | 5 |
|           | humanoid creature. It generally changes shape to  | * |   |
|           | blend in, choosing to look like a pet or          | * |   |
|           | attractive humanoid companion of the one who      |   |   |
|           | summoned them.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Attached eidolons can fly, but not      | M |   |
|           | well. If their current shape doesn't have wings,  | D |   |
|           | it can grow some as a move action.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Terrifying glare:* Twice per battle as a quick   |   |   |
|           | action; the eidolon can terrify each enemy        | * |   |
|           | engaged with it that has 30 hp or fewer (they are | * |   |
|           | dazed and unable to use the escalation die until  | H |   |
|           | the end of their next turn) as a fear effect.     | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Aid Another]{.underline}                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | The eidolon's presence can provide aid to its     |   |   |
|           | allies, especially the one to which it's          |   |   |
|           | attached. Once per round as a quick action, one   |   |   |
|           | of the eidolon's nearby allies can gain one of    |   |   |
|           | the following benefits:                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Winning ways:* The ally's crit range expands by  |   |   |
|           | 1 until the end of the battle.                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Wide smile:* The ally gains a +1 attack bonus    |   |   |
|           | until the end of the battle.                      |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Eidolon in War Form

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 4th    | **Scissors, scythes, and chains +9 vs. AC**---28 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Troop    | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 14 extra damage. | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Spirit   | *Natural 18+:* As above, and the eidolon grabs   | * | 6 |
|          | the target if doesn't already have a creature    | * |   |
|          | grabbed.                                         | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | **R: See the awful truth +9 vs. MD (one nearby   | * | 2 |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---18 psychic damage, and the | * |   |
|          | target is weakened (save ends)                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Psychic link:* Each time a hit enemy rolls the  | * |   |
|          | save against weakened, one of its allies (of the | M |   |
|          | eidolon's choice) takes 14 psychic damage.       | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: The awful nature of reality +9 vs. PD (1d3  | * |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---The target is hampered (save |   |   |
|          | ends); each time the target fails the save, it   | * |   |
|          | takes 14 psychic damage                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Eidolon in Hunting Form

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Slashing jaws +11 vs. AC**---60 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Fading:* The first creature the eidolon hits    | * | 2 |
| Troop    | with an attack each battle must start making     | * |   |
|          | last gasp saves. After the fourth failure, the   |   | 1 |
| Spirit   | target fades away from reality---they are not    | * | 4 |
|          | dead, just gone. Erased. The eidolon can bring   | * |   |
|          | them back at will, another eidolon might also be | P | 2 |
|          | able to retrieve them, and a quest by the        | D | 7 |
|          | adventurers to another realm might retrieve      | * | 0 |
|          | them.                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Eidolon in Guardian Form

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Empowered weapon +14 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---70 | A |   |
| level    | holy damage                                      | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Troop    | *Both attacks hit different targets:* The        | * |   |
|          | eidolon can make its divine proclamation this    |   | 2 |
| Spirit   | turn as a quick action, but it is still only     | * | 0 |
|          | once per battle.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          | *\[Once per battle\]* **C: Divine proclamation   | D | 2 |
|          | +14 vs. PD (all non-immortal creatures within    | * | 0 |
|          | the sound of its voice)**---25 thunder damage,   | * |   |
|          | and 25 ongoing holy damage and target is         |   |   |
|          | weakened (save ends both)                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 25 holy damage.                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\]* **R: Word of judgement +14 | * |   |
|          | vs. MD**---150 holy damage                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* The attack can be used again this        | * |   |
|          | battle.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Flight:* This eidolon chooses to manifest       | P |   |
|          | wings, though its ability to fly has very little | * |   |
|          | to do with flapping them.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Chosen ones:* PCs with positive icon            |   |   |
|          | relationships with the Religious Icon roll those |   |   |
|          | dice at the start of the battle, until the end   |   |   |
|          | of the battle subtract the total rolled amount   |   |   |
|          | from any holy damage the adventurer would        |   |   |
|          | otherwise take. This includes holy damage from   |   |   |
|          | creatures that are not the eidolon.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mission from the gods:* Until the eidolon makes |   |   |
|          | its *divine proclamation*, natural odd attack    |   |   |
|          | rolls against it miss.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Iconic Eidolon

While guardian-form eidolons seem attracted to the service of the
Religious Icon, eidolons can end up allied with any icon that serves the
same interests as they do.

Eidolons who act in the interests of an icon have unusual weaknesses and
strengths related to that icon, eidolons usually call icon-related
oddities 'iconic tests'. How much of these icon-related 'tests' are due
to the eidolons being mythically linked to an icon and how much is a
role that the eidolon is playing is left to you as the GM to decide.

Eidolons usually go out of their way to reveal any weaknesses they have
as part of their 'test' of mortals.

**Magic Icon**---Wizard spells do double damage against the eidolon
(crits do triple). Wizard spells used creatively against the eidolon
have additional effects depending on the whim of the GM.

**Zealous Icon**---The eidolons' attacks do double damage against those
who have positive relationships with the Demonic Icon and sorcerers with
the infernal heritage talent.

**Demonic Icon**---If you are willing to owe a mystically-enforced favor
to the Demonic Icon, you can make this eidolon weakened (--4 attack and
defenses) until the end of your turn.

**Underground Icon**---The eidolon does double damage against those
using magical items, unless they have recently tithed to the Underground
Icon.

**Graceful Icon**---The eidolon takes double damage from attacks made by
bards, and attacks made using bows (but not from crossbows, which do
their normal damage).

**Leader Icon**---Adventurers who fight side-by-side with each other (or
back-to-back) gain +2 to all their defenses while doing so.

**Protector Icon**---Attacks by dragonics, breath weapons, and attacks
from sorcerers with the metallic protector heritage talent deal double
damage to this eidolon.

**Nature Icon**---The eidolon takes double damage from animal
companions, and from druids in beast form. Plants near this eidolon grow
more verdantly, flowers blooming in its presence.

**Undead Icon**---Spend a recovery to weaken (--4 attack and defense)
the eidolon until the end of your turn. Well, we say 'spend' but what
you are actually doing is sacrificing a sliver of your life-energy to
the Undead Icon.

**Brute Icon**---If the attacker subtracts a die from their damage dice
before rolling them, it takes double damage. The extra die of damage
must be used to harm something or somebody relating to cities or
civilization (instead of rolling 3d8 damage you'd roll 2d8x2 damage, and
deal 1d8 damage to a window, book, mayor, etc.). The GM and player
should work together to determine what a 'die of damage' means to
whatever is getting smashed or slashed as part of the attack.

**Religious Icon**---If since the start of the Eidolon's last turn, any
adventurer has received healing from somebody who has a positive or
conflicted relationship with the Religious Icon, then the Eidolon is
dazed (--4 attack) until the end of its next turn.

**Trickster Icon**---Sneak attack damage dice for attacks against this
eidolon are two die types higher (1d4 becomes 1d8, 2d6 becomes 2d10,
etc.). Rogues can shadow walk without needing to make a roll first.

**Draconic Icon**---This eidolon takes double damage from poison,
lightning, or fire attacks, as well as from attacks from sorcerers with
the chromatic destroyer heritage talent deal double damage to this
eidolon.

### Elder Beast

#### Warped Beast

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Tentacle maw +10 vs. AC**---16 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is hampered until the   | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | end of its next turn.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| A         | *Miss:* The warped beast can make a *psychic      | * | 5 |
| berration | blast* attack as a free action.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Psychic blast +10 vs.  | D | 5 |
|           | MD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---8 psychic damage      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is confused until the   |   |   |
|           | end of its next turn.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *One madness feature:* At the start of each of    | M |   |
|           | the warped beast's turns, roll a d6. The warped   | D |   |
|           | beast gains the corresponding ability until the   | * |   |
|           | start of its next turn.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *1. Amorphous oozing form:* The beast has *resist | * |   |
|           | damage 11+* to all damage.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *2. Dimensional slide:* Once during its turn, the | P |   |
|           | warped beast can teleport anywhere nearby it can  | * |   |
|           | see as a move action. Each enemy engaged with it  | * |   |
|           | when it teleports is confused until the end of    |   |   |
|           | its next turn.                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *3. Fear aura:* While engaged with the warped     |   |   |
|           | beast, enemies that have 24 hp or fewer are dazed |   |   |
|           | (--4 attack) and do not add the escalation die to |   |   |
|           | their attacks.                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *4. Gibbering mouths:* When an enemy ends its     |   |   |
|           | turn engaged with the warped beast, it's confused |   |   |
|           | until the end of its next turn.                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *5. Many spontaneous limbs:* When the warped      |   |   |
|           | beast makes a *tentacle maw* attack during its    |   |   |
|           | turn, roll a d4. That many additional limbs or    |   |   |
|           | tentacles spontaneously erupt from the creature   |   |   |
|           | and make an additional basic attack that turn     |   |   |
|           | (special abilities/effects don't trigger on those |   |   |
|           | extra attacks). Each of those attacks only deals  |   |   |
|           | half damage.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *6. Warping touch:* When the warped beast hits a  |   |   |
|           | creature with a *tentacle maw* attack, the target |   |   |
|           | also takes 5 ongoing psychic damage and a --2     |   |   |
|           | penalty to saves (save ends both).                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Warped mutant:* Roll two madness features        |   |   |
|           | instead of one each round (reroll similar         |   |   |
|           | results).                                         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Umluppuk

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Pods of mouths and eyes +12 vs. AC (4          | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---20 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural even hit:* The target is stuck (easy    | * |   |
|          | save ends, 6+).                                  |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 0 |
| erration | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **C: Chorus of madness +12 vs. MD (up to 3       | D | 1 |
|          | random nearby creatures)**---10 ongoing psychic  | * | 0 |
|          | damage, and the target is confused (save ends    | * |   |
|          | both)                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This ability only requires a quick  | * |   |
|          | action (once per round) instead of a standard    | M |   |
|          | action when the umluppuk starts its turn         | D |   |
|          | unengaged (or without an enemy consumed if you   | * |   |
|          | are using the nastier special!).                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist psychic 18+:* When a psychic attack      | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | H |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Consume:* Once per round during its turn, the   |   |   |
|          | umluppuk can make a *consume* attack against a   |   |   |
|          | stuck enemy as a quick action. The umluppuk can  |   |   |
|          | only have one target consumed at a time.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Consume +12 vs. PD (one stuck enemy)**---50    |   |   |
|          | damage, and the target takes 10 ongoing acid     |   |   |
|          | damage and is absorbed into the umluppuk (hard   |   |   |
|          | save ends both, 16+); while inside the umluppuk, |   |   |
|          | the target is vulnerable to the umluppuk's *pods |   |   |
|          | of mouths and eyes* attacks (*attacks vs. it     |   |   |
|          | have crit range expanded by 2*), and it's stuck. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hagunemnon

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 13th   | **Spontaneous metamorphosing limbs +18 vs.       | A |   |
| level    | AC**---110 damage, and the hagunemnon can make a | C | 2 |
|          | *spontaneous metamorphosing limbs* attack        | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | against a different target as a free action      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Ab       | *Natural 19+:* The target starts making last     | * | 7 |
| erration | gasp saves. On the fourth failure, it becomes a  | * |   |
|          | shapeless ooze.                                  | P | 8 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Diminishing limbs:* With each subsequent hit    | * | 4 |
|          | after the first, *spontaneous metamorphosing     | * |   |
|          | limbs* deals 20 less damage. The hagunemnon also |   |   |
|          | doesn't gain any extra attacks when it makes a   | * |   |
|          | basic attack.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Dimension hop:* As a move action when the       | D |   |
|          | escalation die is odd, the hagunemnon can        | * |   |
|          | teleport nearby or faraway to a location it can  | * |   |
|          | see.                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist psychic 18+:* When a psychic attack      | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | H |   |
|          | natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | P |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | hagunemnon can change its form to that of any    |   |   |
|          | large or medium creature, or back to its own     |   |   |
|          | shape. Seeing through the shapechange requires a |   |   |
|          | DC 25 skill check.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Madness aura:* When a creature is engaged with  |   |   |
|          | the hagunemnon at the start of its turn, it      |   |   |
|          | takes 4d10 psychic damage. If it takes 31 or     |   |   |
|          | more damage this way during a single turn, it's  |   |   |
|          | also confused until the start of its next turn.  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Elemental

#### Small Air Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Slam +8 vs. AC**---5 damage                     | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Swirling winds +8 vs. PD (1d3 random         | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | conscious nearby enemies)**---5 damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from the | * | 3 |
|           | elemental.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Flight:* It's quick and lively.                  | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist non-spell damage 16+:* When a non-spell   | * |   |
|           | attack targets this creature, the attacker must   |   |   |
|           | roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only  | * |   |
|           | deals half damage.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Small Earth Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Rocky fists +7 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 2 damage.                                 | * | 8 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Repair damage 10 and below:* When the earth      |   | 1 |
| Elemental | elemental is targeted by a natural attack roll of | * | 3 |
|           | 10 or less, the elemental heals 1d6 damage before | * |   |
|           | taking any damage from the attack.                | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | [Nastier Specials for all earth                   | * |   |
|           | elementals]{.underline}                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Burrow:* Not all earth elementals burrow, though | * |   |
|           | if yours is particularly nasty or associated with | * |   |
|           | a particular icon, it can.                        | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Small Fire Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Whipping flames +8 vs. PD**---8 fire damage,    | A |   |
| level     | and 4 ongoing fire damage to a random nearby      | C | 1 |
|           | enemy (including an unconscious one)              | * | 8 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Melee burn:* When an enemy makes a natural odd   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | melee attack roll against the fire elemental,     | * | 5 |
|           | that attacker takes 1d8 fire damage.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets     | D | 8 |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Small Water Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Surge +7 vs. AC (up to 2 enemies)**---8 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* The elemental heals 3 hp.                 | * | 6 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Liquid empowerment:* The water elemental gains a |   | 1 |
| Elemental | +2 bonus to attacks and all defenses while it's   | * | 2 |
|           | in contact with a body of water, or while it's    | * |   |
|           | nearby a sizeable body of water. A bucket or a    | P | 4 |
|           | bathtub of liquid doesn't count; it must be at    | D | 0 |
|           | least a pond, creek, or maybe a large fountain.   | * |   |
|           | If the water elemental moves faraway from the     | * |   |
|           | body of water the empowerment ends.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist weapon damage 16+:* When a weapon attack  | * |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   | M |   |
|           | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals   | D |   |
|           | half damage.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Air Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Slam +10 vs. AC**---12 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Swirling winds +10 vs. PD (1d3 random nearby | * | 9 |
| Wrecker   | conscious enemies)**---14 damage                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from the | * | 5 |
|           | elemental.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | *Flight:* It's quick and lively.                  | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist non-spell damage 16+:* When a non-spell   | * |   |
|           | attack targets this creature, the attacker must   |   |   |
|           | roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only  | * |   |
|           | deals half damage.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Whirlwind transformation:* Roll a d10 at the     | D |   |
|           | start of each of the air elemental's turns. If    | * |   |
|           | you roll less than or equal to the escalation     | * |   |
|           | die, it shifts into whirlwind form until the end  |   |   |
|           | of the battle. While in this form it gains the    | * |   |
|           | following improved attack (and you stop rolling   | * |   |
|           | *whirlwind transformation* checks):               | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | **Elemental whirlwind +10 vs. PD (each enemy      | * |   |
|           | engaged with it *and* one nearby enemy)**---14    | * |   |
|           | damage                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Earth Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Rocky fists +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---11 damage | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Miss:* 4 damage.                                 | * | 0 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Boulder up:* Roll a d10 at the start of each of  |   | 1 |
| Elemental | the earth elemental's turns. If you roll less     | * | 5 |
|           | than or equal to the escalation die, it shifts    | * |   |
|           | into boulder guardian form until the end of the   | P | 6 |
|           | battle. While in this form, it gains a +2 bonus   | D | 6 |
|           | to AC and the *relentless pursuit* ability (and   | * |   |
|           | you stop rolling *boulder up* checks).            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Relentless pursuit:* The elemental must be in    | * |   |
|           | boulder guardian form to use this ability.        | * |   |
|           | Staggered enemies can't disengage from the earth  | M |   |
|           | elemental. (They can pop free, but they can't     | D |   |
|           | roll disengage checks.)                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Repair damage 10 and below:* When the earth      |   |   |
|           | elemental is targeted by a natural attack roll of | * |   |
|           | 10 or less, the elemental heals 1d12 damage       | * |   |
|           | before taking any damage from the attack.         | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Whipping flames +10 vs. PD**---14 fire damage,  | A |   |
| level     | and 7 ongoing fire damage to a random nearby      | C | 2 |
|           | enemy (including an unconscious one)              | * | 0 |
| Wrecker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Melee burn:* When an enemy makes a natural odd   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | melee attack roll against the fire elemental,     | * | 7 |
|           | that attacker takes 1d12 fire damage.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets     | D | 4 |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wildfire transformation:* Roll a d10 at the      | * |   |
|           | start of each of the fire elemental's turns. If   | M |   |
|           | you roll less than or equal to the escalation     | D |   |
|           | die, it shifts into wildfire form until the end   | * |   |
|           | of the battle. While in this form, it gains the   | * |   |
|           | following improved attack (and you stop rolling   |   |   |
|           | *wildfire transformation* checks):                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Elemental wildfire +10 vs. PD (one nearby    | H |   |
|           | enemy OR each nearby enemy taking ongoing fire    | P |   |
|           | damage)**---20 fire damage, and 7 ongoing fire    | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 7 ongoing fire damage.                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Water Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Surge +9 vs. AC (up to 2 enemies)**---14 damage | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* The elemental heals 6 hp.                 | * | 8 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Great wave transformation:* Roll a d10 at the    |   | 1 |
| Elemental | start of each of the water elemental's turns. If  | * | 4 |
|           | you roll less than or equal to the escalation     | * |   |
|           | die, it shifts into great wave form until the end | P | 6 |
|           | of the battle. While in this form, each enemy     | D | 6 |
|           | engaged with the elemental is hampered (and you   | * |   |
|           | stop rolling *great wave transformation* checks). | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Liquid empowerment:* The water elemental gains a | * |   |
|           | +2 bonus to attacks and all defenses while it's   | * |   |
|           | in contact with a body of water, or while it's    | M |   |
|           | nearby a sizeable body of water. A bucket or a    | D |   |
|           | bathtub of liquid doesn't count; it must be at    | * |   |
|           | least a pond, creek, or maybe a large fountain.   | * |   |
|           | If the water elemental moves faraway from the     |   |   |
|           | body of water the empowerment ends.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist weapon damage 16+:* When a weapon attack  | H |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   | P |   |
|           | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals   | * |   |
|           | half damage.                                      | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Air Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 7th     | **Slam +13 vs. AC**---20 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **C: Swirling winds +13 vs. PD (1d3 random        | * | 1 |
| Wrecker   | conscious nearby enemies)**---22 damage           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from the | * | 7 |
|           | elemental.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Flight:* It's quick and direct.                  | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist non-spell damage 16+:* When a non-spell   | * |   |
|           | attack targets this creature, the attacker must   |   |   |
|           | roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only  | * |   |
|           | deals half damage.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Whirlwind transformation:* Roll a d8 at the      | D |   |
|           | start of each of the air elemental's turns. If    | * |   |
|           | you roll less than or equal to the escalation     | * |   |
|           | die, it shifts into whirlwind form until the end  |   |   |
|           | of the battle. While in this form it gains the    | * |   |
|           | following improved attack (and you stop rolling   | * |   |
|           | *whirlwind transformation* checks):               | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | **Elemental whirlwind +13 vs. PD (each enemy      | * |   |
|           | engaged with it *and* one nearby enemy)**---22    | * |   |
|           | damage                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Earth Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 7th     | **Rocky fists +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---16       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| Blocker   | *Miss:* 7 damage.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Boulder up:* Roll a d8 at the start of each of   | * | 7 |
|           | the earth elemental's turns. If you roll less     | * |   |
|           | than or equal to the escalation die, it shifts    | P | 9 |
|           | into boulder guardian form until the end of the   | D | 4 |
|           | battle. While in this form, it gains a +2 bonus   | * |   |
|           | to AC and the relentless pursuit ability (and you | * |   |
|           | stop rolling *boulder up* checks).                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Relentless pursuit:* The elemental must be in    | * |   |
|           | boulder guardian form to use this ability.        | M |   |
|           | Staggered enemies can't disengage from the earth  | D |   |
|           | elemental. (They can pop free, but they can't     | * |   |
|           | roll disengage checks.)                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Repair damage 10 and below:* When the earth      | * |   |
|           | elemental is targeted by a natural attack roll of | * |   |
|           | 10 or less, the elemental heals 3d6 damage before | H |   |
|           | taking any damage from the attack.                | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Fire Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 7th     | **Whipping flames +12 vs. PD**---22 fire damage,  | A |   |
| level     | and 11 ongoing fire damage to a random nearby     | C | 2 |
|           | enemy (including an unconscious one)              | * | 2 |
| Wrecker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Melee burn:* When an enemy makes a natural odd   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | melee attack roll against the fire elemental,     | * | 9 |
|           | that attacker takes 2d12 fire damage.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets     | D | 2 |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wildfire transformation:* Roll a d8 at the start | * |   |
|           | of each of the fire elemental's turns. If you     | M |   |
|           | roll less than or equal to the escalation die, it | D |   |
|           | shifts into wildfire form until the end of the    | * |   |
|           | battle. While in this form, it gains the          | * |   |
|           | following improved attack (and you stop rolling   |   |   |
|           | *wildfire transformation* checks):                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Elemental wildfire +12 vs. PD (one nearby    | H |   |
|           | enemy OR each nearby enemy taking ongoing fire    | P |   |
|           | damage)**---30 fire damage, and 11 ongoing fire   | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 11 ongoing fire damage.                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Water Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Surge +11 vs. AC (up to 2 enemies)**---22      | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Blocker  | *Miss:* The elemental heals 9 hp.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Great wave transformation:* Roll a d8 at the    | * | 6 |
| lemental | start of each of the water elemental's turns. If | * |   |
|          | you roll less than or equal to the escalation    | P | 1 |
|          | die, it shifts into great wave form until the    | D | 0 |
|          | end of the battle. While in this form, each      | * | 0 |
|          | enemy engaged with the elemental is hampered     | * |   |
|          | (and you stop rolling *great wave                |   |   |
|          | transformation* checks).                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Liquid empowerment:* The water elemental gains  | M |   |
|          | a +2 bonus to attacks and all defenses while     | D |   |
|          | it's in contact with a body of water, or while   | * |   |
|          | it's nearby a sizeable body of water. A bucket   | * |   |
|          | or a bathtub of liquid doesn't count; it must be |   |   |
|          | at least a pond, creek, or maybe a large         | * |   |
|          | fountain. If the water elemental moves faraway   | * |   |
|          | from the body of water the empowerment ends.     | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Resist weapon damage 16+:* When a weapon attack | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Air Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Slam +15 vs. AC**---40 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **C: Swirling winds +15 vs. PD (1d3 random       | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | conscious nearby enemies)**---40 damage          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from    | * | 9 |
| lemental | the elemental.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Flight:* It's quick and forceful.               | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Resist non-spell damage 16+:* When a non-spell  | * |   |
|          | attack targets this creature, the attacker must  |   |   |
|          | roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only | * |   |
|          | deals half damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Whirlwind transformation:* Roll a d6 at the     | D |   |
|          | start of each of the air elemental's turns. If   | * |   |
|          | you roll less than or equal to the escalation    | * |   |
|          | die, it shifts into whirlwind form until the end |   |   |
|          | of the battle. While in this form it gains the   | * |   |
|          | following improved attack (and you stop rolling  | * |   |
|          | *whirlwind transformation* checks):              | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | **Elemental whirlwind +15 vs. PD (each enemy     | * |   |
|          | engaged with it and one nearby enemy)**---40     | * |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Gale force jets +15 vs. PD (one nearby or   |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---40 damage                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is dazed until    |   |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Earth Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Rocky fists +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---28      | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Blocker  | *Miss:* 14 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Boulder up:* Roll a d6 at the start of each of  | * | 9 |
| lemental | the earth elemental's turns. If you roll less    | * |   |
|          | than or equal to the escalation die, it shifts   | P | 1 |
|          | into boulder guardian form until the end of the  | D | 7 |
|          | battle. While in this form, it gains a +2 bonus  | * | 0 |
|          | to AC and the relentless pursuit ability (and    | * |   |
|          | you stop rolling *boulder up* checks).           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Relentless pursuit:* The elemental must be in   | * |   |
|          | boulder guardian form to use this ability.       | M |   |
|          | Staggered enemies can't disengage from the earth | D |   |
|          | elemental. (They can pop free, but they can't    | * |   |
|          | roll disengage checks.)                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Repair damage 10 and below:* When the earth     | * |   |
|          | elemental is targeted by a natural attack roll   | * |   |
|          | of 10 or less, the elemental heals 5d6 damage    | H |   |
|          | before taking any damage from the attack.        | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Endless vitality:* When an enemy engaged with   |   |   |
|          | the epic earth elemental heals using one or more |   |   |
|          | recoveries, the elemental heals 5d6 hit points.  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Fire Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Whipping flames +14 vs. PD**---40 fire damage, | A |   |
| level    | and 20 ongoing fire damage to a random nearby    | C | 2 |
|          | enemy (including an unconscious one)             | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Melee burn:* When an enemy makes a natural odd  |   | 2 |
| E        | melee attack roll against the fire elemental,    | * | 1 |
| lemental | that attacker takes 3d12 fire damage.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    | D | 6 |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * | 6 |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Wildfire transformation:* Roll a d6 at the      | * |   |
|          | start of each of the fire elemental's turns. If  | M |   |
|          | you roll less than or equal to the escalation    | D |   |
|          | die, it shifts into wildfire form until the end  | * |   |
|          | of the battle. While in this form, it gains the  | * |   |
|          | following improved attack (and you stop rolling  |   |   |
|          | *wildfire transformation* checks):               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Elemental wildfire +14 vs. PD (one nearby   | H |   |
|          | enemy OR each nearby enemy taking ongoing fire   | P |   |
|          | damage)**---55 fire damage, and 20 ongoing fire  | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 ongoing fire damage.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Fire elementals that can fly are rare. |   |   |
|          | This one can, and it only touches the ground to  |   |   |
|          | set something ablaze.                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Water Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Surge +13 vs. AC (up to 2 enemies)**---22      | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Blocker  | *Miss:* The elemental heals 9 hp.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Great wave transformation:* Roll a d6 at the    | * | 8 |
| lemental | start of each of the water elemental's turns. If | * |   |
|          | you roll less than or equal to the escalation    | P | 1 |
|          | die, it shifts into great wave form until the    | D | 7 |
|          | end of the battle. While in this form, each      | * | 0 |
|          | enemy engaged with the elemental is hampered     | * |   |
|          | (and you stop rolling *great wave                |   |   |
|          | transformation* checks).                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Liquid empowerment:* The water elemental gains  | M |   |
|          | a +2 bonus to attacks and all defenses while     | D |   |
|          | it's in contact with a body of water, or while   | * |   |
|          | it's nearby a sizeable body of water. A bucket   | * |   |
|          | or a bathtub of liquid doesn't count; it must be |   |   |
|          | at least a pond, creek, or maybe a large         | * |   |
|          | fountain. If the water elemental moves faraway   | * |   |
|          | from the body of water the empowerment ends.     | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Resist weapon damage 16+:* When a weapon attack | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Elemental Beast

[Making Elemental Beasts]{.underline}

Any creature with the \[BEAST\] type can become an elemental beast, just
follow these guidelines.

The base creature loses whatever resistances and vulnerabilities it had
and gains those listed for its elemental affinity. It also gains between
one and three elemental abilities for that affinity from the options
below.

With just one ability, as well as a new vulnerability and resistance,
creatures that become elemental beasts aren't powerful or changed enough
to warrant adjusting their level for purposes of creating encounters.
However, you may want to up-level beasts with two or three abilities
depending on those abilities and your desired level of difficulty,
especially if you're creating a battle with several elemental beasts.

For balance, simplicity, pacing, and playability, don't use more than
three abilities for an elemental beast.

[Powers of Air]{.underline}

All elemental beasts with an affinity for air gain the following three
abilities:

-   *Flight:* This creature can fly.

-   *Resist thunder 16+*

-   *Resist lightning 16+*

All air elemental beasts have *vulnerability: force*.

In addition, choose at least one and no more than three additional
abilities from the following list.

-   *Swirling winds:* When a ranged attack targets this creature, the
    attacker must roll 2d20 and take the lowest result.

-   *D*ust devil: Make the following attack as a standard action.

    -   **C: Swirling dust devil +5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies
        in a group)**---The target is dazed (save ends)

-   *Gust front:* When this creature rolls a natural even hit with an
    attack, it can pop free from the target of that attack.

-   *Static field:* Each enemy engaged with this creature at the start
    of its turn takes lightning damage equal to this creature's level ×
    3.

-   *Lightning rod:* Any attack against this creature's nearby ally that
    deals lightning damage instead targets this creature.

[Powers of Earth]{.underline}

All elemental beasts with an affinity for earth gain the following three
abilities.

-   *Roots of earth:* When an effect would move this creature, roll a
    save. On a success, the creature doesn't move.

-   *Resist force 16+*

-   *Resist poison 16+*

All earth elemental beasts have *vulnerability: thunder*.

In addition, choose at least one and no more than three additional
abilities from the following list.

-   *Indomitable:* This creature gains a +2 bonus to MD.

-   *Skin of stone:* This creature takes normal damage from critical
    hits. In addition, once per battle as a free action, it can take
    only half damage from an attack that hits.

-   *Earthsea:* The creature gains the *burrower* trait if it does not
    already have it.

-   *Rockslide:* When this creature moves before making an attack, it
    deals additional damage equal to twice its level on a hit.

-   *Mending earth:* Once per battle as a standard action, this creature
    can heal 15 hp or 20% of its maximum health, whichever is higher. It
    can only use this ability while it is in contact with the ground.

[Powers of Fire]{.underline}

All elemental beasts with an affinity for fire gain the following
abilities.

-   *Blazing brighter:* When this creature is targeted by fire or
    lightning attacks, it gains a cumulative +1 bonus to attack rolls
    until the end of the battle (max: +4)

-   *Resist fire 16+*

-   *Resist lightning 16+*

All fire elemental beasts have *vulnerability: cold*.

In addition, choose at least one and no more than three additional
abilities from the following list.

-   *Ashen earth:* Each enemy engaged with this creature at the start of
    its turn takes ongoing fire damage equal to this creature's level ×
    2.

-   *Magma skin:* When an enemy hits this creature with a melee attack,
    it takes damage equal to this creature's level × 3.

-   *Burning breath:* This creature can make the following attack as a
    standard action.

    -   **C: Burning breath +5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies in a
        group)**---d6 × level fire damage

-   *Obsidian shards:* When this creature is hit with cold damage, it
    gains temporary hit points equal to its level × 4.

-   *Heat exhaustion:* When an enemy engaged with this creature heals
    using a recovery, it gains only half the normal healing.

[Powers of Water]{.underline}

All elemental beasts with an affinity for water gain the following
abilities.

-   *Fluid motion:* This creature rerolls all natural 2 attack rolls.

-   *Resist cold 16+*

-   *Resist acid 16+*

All water elemental beasts have *vulnerability: fire*.

In addition, choose at least one and no more than three additional
abilities from the following list.

-   *Torrent:* When an enemy intercepts this creature, it takes cold
    damage equal to this creature's level × 3.

-   *Flow like water:* This creature can disengage freely without
    needing to roll a disengage check.

-   *Blood streams freely:* While this creature is staggered, its crit
    range expands by 2.

-   *Fish in the sea:* While fighting underwater or in a watery
    environment (heavy rain, knee-deep swamp), this creature gains a +1
    bonus to all defenses and to saving throws.

-   *Splashback:* This creature gains a +2 bonus to attack rolls against
    creatures that attacked it during the last round.

#### Badger

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Tearing chomp +6 vs. AC**---4 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 2 damage.                                 | * | 5 |
| Wrecker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The badger can make a         |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *kicking claw* attack against the target as a     | * | 1 |
|           | free action.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | **Kicking claw +6 vs. AC**---3 damage             | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Burrower:* The badger can burrow (see page 200   | * |   |
|           | of the core rulebook). It gains a +2 bonus to     |   |   |
|           | attack rolls the turn after it emerges from the   | * |   |
|           | ground. It can begin a battle underground.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Persistent predator:* When an enemy disengages   | D |   |
|           | from a badger, the badger rolls a save. On a      | * |   |
|           | success, the badger can immediately move to       | * |   |
|           | engage that enemy as a free action.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Little ball of rage:* While the badger is        | P |   |
|           | staggered, it deals 2 extra damage, hit or miss.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Thick hide:* The badger ignores the first 4      |   |   |
|           | damage dealt to it each turn.                     |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rat Swarm

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 1st     | **Bleeding bite +6 vs. AC**---5 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 5 ongoing    | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Small and nimble:* Rat swarms gain a +5 bonus to | * | 1 |
|           | disengage checks and take only half damage from   | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Disease carrier:* When an enemy engaged with the |   |   |
|           | rat swarm heals using a recovery, they must       | * |   |
|           | reroll the highest die and take the second roll.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Overwhelming distraction:* Enemies engaged with  | D |   |
|           | the rat swarm take a --2 penalty to attack any    | * |   |
|           | other enemy than the rat swarm.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | AC 18                                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | PD 14 HP 24                                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | MD 11                                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Venomous Snake

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 1st     | **Swift strike +6 vs. AC**---3 damage, and 3      | A |   |
| level     | ongoing poison damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Troop     | *Special:* The venomous snake gains a +2 bonus to | * |   |
|           | attack rolls with this ability against creatures  |   | 1 |
| Beast     | with a lower initiative.                          | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Venom spit +6 vs. AC**---3 ongoing poison    | P | 2 |
|           | damage                                            | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is dazed (save ends).   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Erratic movement:* Venomous snakes can't be      | * |   |
|           | intercepted.                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Poisonous skin:* When an enemy hits the venomous | * |   |
|           | snake with a melee attack, that enemy takes 3     |   |   |
|           | poison damage.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shed skin:* As a free action during its turn,    | H |   |
|           | the venomous snake can take 4 damage to end any   | P |   |
|           | ongoing effect on it.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Great Cat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Pounce and rend +8 vs. AC**---10 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Special:* If the great cat moves before making   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | this attack, it takes a --1 penalty to the attack | * |   |
|           | roll but gains a +4 bonus to the damage.          |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | **Paw swat +8 vs. AC**---8 damage, and the target | * |   |
|           | pops free from the great cat                      | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | *Powerful leap:* When the escalation die is odd,  | * |   |
|           | the great cat can jump across the battlefield as  | * |   |
|           | a move action, avoiding obstacles and dangers. It |   |   |
|           | can't be intercepted when leaping.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Stunning roar:* As a quick action when the       | * |   |
|           | escalation die is even, the great cat can make    | * |   |
|           | the following attack.                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Unnerving roar +8 vs. MD (1d3 enemies        | * |   |
|           | engaged with it)**---The target takes a --2       | H |   |
|           | penalty to attack rolls against the great cat     | P |   |
|           | until the end of the great cat's next turn.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Bird of Prey

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Beak and claws +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7      | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   | **Diving strike +9 vs. AC---**20 damage           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Limited use:* The giant bird of prey must move   | * | 4 |
|           | before making this attack.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | **Wing buffet +8 vs. PD**---7 damage, and the     | D | 0 |
|           | target pops free from the giant bird              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is also dazed      |   |   |
|           | until the end of its next turn.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* The giant bird of prey flies fast and   | M |   |
|           | strong, but needs a little time to maneuver. It   | D |   |
|           | can't be intercepted during its movement except   | * |   |
|           | by a truly amazing enemy flyer.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Talon grab +9 vs. AC**---11 damage, and the     | H |   |
|           | giant bird of prey grabs the target unless the    | P |   |
|           | target is large or bigger. Until the target       | * |   |
|           | escapes, it moves with the bird of prey when it   | * |   |
|           | moves. If it breaks free while in the air, it     |   |   |
|           | takes 4d6 damage from the fall                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ettercap

#### Ettercap Acolyte

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Sacrificial dagger +6 vs. AC**---3 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Fanatical devotion:* As a standard action, an    | * | 3 |
| Mook      | ettercap acolyte can deal 2d6 poison damage to    | * |   |
|           | one dazed, hampered, or stuck enemy engaged with  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | it. The ettercap acolyte also takes 7 damage from | * | 5 |
|           | this kamikaze action, killing it.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Goopy webs:* When an enemy of level 3 or lower   | D |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1--5 with a melee attack against  | * |   |
|           | an ettercap acolyte, that enemy is dazed (save    | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ettercap Hunter

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Poison bite +7 vs. AC**---6 damage, and 4       | A |   |
| level     | ongoing poison damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Blocker   | *Miss:* If the target is dazed, hampered, or      | * |   |
|           | stuck, it takes 4 extra damage.                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | **C: Web spray +8 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies in a | * |   |
|           | group)**---3 damage                               | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save  | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is stuck (save      | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Goopy webs:* When an enemy of level 4 or lower   | * |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1--5 with a melee attack against  |   |   |
|           | an ettercap hunter, that enemy is dazed (save     | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ettercap Supplicant

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Sacrificial dagger +7 vs. AC**---8 damage, and  | A |   |
| level     | the ettercap supplicant can use *the web that     | C | 1 |
|           | burns* an additional time this battle.            | * | 4 |
| Caster    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: The skein of pain +8 vs. MD**---10 psychic   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | damage, and until the end of the battle, the      | * | 7 |
|           | target takes 1d6 psychic damage each time it      | * |   |
|           | fails a save.                                     | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | **C: The web that burns +8 vs. PD (1d3 nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemies in a group)**---6 ongoing acid damage     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save  | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Goopy webs:* When an enemy of level 5 or lower   | * |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1--5 with a melee attack against  |   |   |
|           | an ettercap supplicant, that enemy is dazed (save | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ettercap Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | **Thrusting spear +9 vs. AC**---8 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The ettercap warrior can make a    | * | 5 |
| Blocker   | *poison bite* attack as a free action.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even miss:* 4 damage.                    | * | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Poison bite +9 vs. AC**---6 damage, and 4       | P | 4 |
|           | ongoing poison damage                             | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* If the target is dazed, hampered, or      | * |   |
|           | stuck, it takes 4 damage.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Web spray +9 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies in a | * |   |
|           | group)**---4 damage                               | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save  | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is stuck (save      | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Goopy webs:* When an enemy of level 5 or lower   | * |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1--5 with a melee attack against  |   |   |
|           | an ettercap warrior, that enemy is dazed (save    |   |   |
|           | ends).                                            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ettercap Keeper

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Staff and fangs +9 vs. AC**---10 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* 5 ongoing poison      | * | 5 |
| Leader    | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Staff of tongues +9 vs. MD (one nearby or    | * | 8 |
|           | faraway enemy)**---15 psychic damage, and the     | * |   |
|           | target can't cast spells or speak (save ends)     | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | **C: Her first whisper +9 vs. MD (each nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemy engaged with one or more ettercaps)**---10  | * |   |
|           | ongoing psychic damage                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | **R: Her other thought +9 vs. MD (one nearby      | D |   |
|           | enemy per point on esc. die)**---13 psychic       | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 7 psychic damage.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *The web of faith:* While one or more lower-level | * |   |
|           | non-mook ettercap allies are nearby it, the       | * |   |
|           | ettercap keeper gains *resist damage 16+*.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Goopy webs:* When an enemy of level 6 or lower   |   |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1--5 with a melee attack against  |   |   |
|           | an ettercap keeper, that enemy is dazed (save     |   |   |
|           | ends).                                            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ettin

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **First big swing +10 vs. AC**---25 damage, and  | A |   |
| level    | the target pops free from the ettin; then as a   | C | 1 |
|          | free action, the ettin can move (or choose not   | * | 8 |
| Troop    | to move) and make a *second swing* attack.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *\[Special trigger\]* **Second swing +10 vs. AC  | * | 4 |
|          | (different target from *first big swing*)**---15 | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Two-headed save:* If an ettin's first save      | * | 0 |
|          | against an effect fails, it can roll a second    | * |   |
|          | save.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Big bully:* The ettin deals double damage with  | D |   |
|          | its attacks against staggered enemies.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Escalating agreement:* If the escalation die is |   |   |
|          | 3+, the ettin can target two engaged enemies     | * |   |
|          | with its *first big swing* attack.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Fallen Icon -- Nature

#### Barrier Beast

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | Vulnerability: varies (see *if it bleeds*)       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Barrier breaker (1 target, or adjusted targets | * | 4 |
| Spoiler  | equal to the escalation die; see *melee breaker* | * |   |
|          | ability below) +16 vs. AC**---125 damage         |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* One normal structure | * |   |
|          | of house or ship size that the barrier beast is  | P | 7 |
|          | next to is destroyed.                            | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 20 extra damage and the      | * |   |
|          | target stuck and weakened until the start of the |   |   |
|          | barrier beast's next turn, until the beast       | * |   |
|          | moves, or until it uses *beast surge*.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* A non-druidic spell cast on the   | D |   |
|          | barrier beast ends. If there are none, a         | * |   |
|          | non-druidic spell cast on the target ends.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 20:* All non-druidic spells cast on the | * |   |
|          | barrier beast or the target end.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Miss:* 50 damage                                | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Melee breaker:* The barrier beast's *barrier    | * |   |
|          | breaker* attack can target 1 engaged enemy, or   |   |   |
|          | engaged enemies equal to the escalation die; or  |   |   |
|          | the attack can target a nearby enemy for a       |   |   |
|          | 'cost' of two points on the escalation die. For  |   |   |
|          | example, if the escalation die is 6, the attack  |   |   |
|          | could target two engaged enemies and two nearby  |   |   |
|          | enemies.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wild Ability:* Each barrier beasts has one of   |   |   |
|          | the following wild abilities.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Amphibious:* The barrier beast can swim         |   |   |
|          | underwater swiftly and indefinitely.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Burrowing:* As amphibious, but instead of       |   |   |
|          | travelling underwater the barrier beast can      |   |   |
|          | "swim" through the earth.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* The barrier beast can fly very         |   |   |
|          | quickly, if not very gracefully.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mountain Shell:* Twice per battle as a standard |   |   |
|          | action, the barrier beast can gain a +4 to all   |   |   |
|          | defenses until it makes an attack.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Regrowth:* Twice per battle as a standard       |   |   |
|          | action, the barrier beast can regain 100 hit     |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Beast surge:* Once per round when a barrier     |   |   |
|          | beast takes more than 100 damage from an attack, |   |   |
|          | all enemy-caused conditions affecting the        |   |   |
|          | barrier beast end. Then the barrier beast rolls  |   |   |
|          | a normal save; if the save succeeds, the barrier |   |   |
|          | beast gets an additional free action that        |   |   |
|          | depends on its *wild ability* (see below):       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | If the barrier beast has *amphibious, burrowing, |   |   |
|          | or flight*, it can choose to swim/burrow/ or fly |   |   |
|          | someplace faraway without taking opportunity     |   |   |
|          | attacks as a free action. At the start of its    |   |   |
|          | next turn, the barrier beast gains a free move   |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | If the barrier beasts has *mountain shell*, it   |   |   |
|          | uses it as a free action that does not count     |   |   |
|          | against its uses of the ability.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | If the barrier beast has *regrowth*, it can use  |   |   |
|          | that ability as a free action as a free action   |   |   |
|          | that does not count against its uses of the      |   |   |
|          | ability.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Beast resilience:* At-will and basic attacks do |   |   |
|          | not deal miss damage to a barrier beast, and     |   |   |
|          | when an attack against AC or PD targets this     |   |   |
|          | creature it deals half damage unless the natural |   |   |
|          | attack roll is 16+.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | This ability does not work against attacks it is |   |   |
|          | vulnerable to, and ends when the escalation die  |   |   |
|          | is 6+.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shrug:* The barrier beast ignores damage that's |   |   |
|          | less than 10.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *If it bleeds:* Each barrier beast is vulnerable |   |   |
|          | to one damage type (chosen by the GM or          |   |   |
|          | determined randomly). When a barrier beast is    |   |   |
|          | hit by an attack it is vulnerable to, it cannot  |   |   |
|          | use *beast surge* until the end of its next      |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Big enough:* A barrier beast is immune to       |   |   |
|          | opportunity attacks from any creature that is    |   |   |
|          | not huge size or larger (like a barrier beast).  |   |   |
|          | Normal sized enemies can disengage from a        |   |   |
|          | barrier beast by rolling 6+ instead of the       |   |   |
|          | normal 11+.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wilder beast:* The barrier beast has two (or    |   |   |
|          | even three!) *wild abilities* instead of one.    |   |   |
|          | Choose which additional effect is used each time |   |   |
|          | beast surge is triggered.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Breath weapon:* When the escalation die is even |   |   |
|          | the barrier beast can make a *breath weapon*     |   |   |
|          | attack as a quick action once per round, or use  |   |   |
|          | it as the additional effect when *beast surge*   |   |   |
|          | is triggered. Pick or roll a random energy type  |   |   |
|          | that is different from the vulnerability of the  |   |   |
|          | barrier beast. *Breath weapon* does that type of |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Breath weapon +16 vs. PD (1d4 nearby or     |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---40 damage        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* 20 ongoing damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage                                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fallen Icon -- Nature

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Huge 14th level spoiler \[BEAST\]                | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 14th   | Initiative: +17                                  | A | 24 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | **Wrathful Earth + 19 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---60  | * | 24 |
| Spoiler  | damage                                           | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 14 |
| Beast    | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck and takes 60  | * | 00 |
|          | ongoing damage (hard save ends both). Until the  | * |    |
|          | target saves it remains engaged with the Fallen  | P |    |
|          | Icon, though it cannot be otherwise targeted or  | D |    |
|          | damaged by the Fallen Icon (which does nothing   | * |    |
|          | to prevent the Fallen Icon's allies from piling  | * |    |
|          | on!). If the target attacks and hits the Fallen  |   |    |
|          | Icon for more than 100 damage, their next save   | * |    |
|          | against the *wrathful earth* effect is an easy   | * |    |
|          | one (6+).                                        | M |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | **C: Angry Sky + 19 vs. PD (all nearby flying    | * |    |
|          | enemies, and a number of random nearby enemies   | * |    |
|          | equal to the escalation die, one attack per      |   |    |
|          | target, or all nearby enemies when the           | * |    |
|          | escalation die is 6 or higher)**---50 lightning  | * |    |
|          | damage and target loses the flight ability (save | H |    |
|          | ends)                                            | P |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 30 thunder damage.          | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 15 cold damage.              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Special trigger:* Use as a free action once per |   |    |
|          | turn at the start of the Fallen Icon's turn.     |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Ambulatory landscape:* When the Fallen Icon     |   |    |
|          | uses its first move action each turn, each       |   |    |
|          | creature of less than huge size that is engaged  |   |    |
|          | with or next to it before or after the movement  |   |    |
|          | takes 60 damage. In addition, the Fallen Icon is |   |    |
|          | immune to opportunity attacks. Enemies of less   |   |    |
|          | than huge size can disengage from it with an     |   |    |
|          | easy save (6+).                                  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Wildest shape:* At the start of its turn, the   |   |    |
|          | Fallen Icon can change its creature type to      |   |    |
|          | beast, elemental, or plant. This ends all        |   |    |
|          | conditions affecting it.                         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural resistance:* The Fallen Icon has        |   |    |
|          | *resist poison 16+*. In addition, as a beast it  |   |    |
|          | has *resist cold 16+*. As a plant it has *resist |   |    |
|          | lightning 16+*. As an elemental it has *resist   |   |    |
|          | fire 16+*.                                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Earth and sea and sky:* The Fallen Icon can     |   |    |
|          | sprout wings to clumsily fly, and can swim       |   |    |
|          | indefinitely at any depth.                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural supremacy:* The Fallen Icon's existence |   |    |
|          | disrupts arcane magic and divine magic (but not  |   |    |
|          | druidic magic): natural odd hits by arcane and   |   |    |
|          | divine spells miss the Fallen Icon, while odd    |   |    |
|          | misses are rerolled against an enemy engaged     |   |    |
|          | with the Fallen Icon. Natural 1s target the      |   |    |
|          | caster.                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Enemy of civilization:* As a move action, the   |   |    |
|          | Fallen Icon can destroy one ordinary structure   |   |    |
|          | it can reach, such as a house, castle wall,      |   |    |
|          | temple, or ship. The structure is automatically  |   |    |
|          | rendered useless, and each creature inside or on |   |    |
|          | the structure is subject to a *collapse* attack  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Collapse +16 vs. PD (each creature in/on       |   |    |
|          | structure)**---90 damage and the target is stuck |   |    |
|          | and takes 20 ongoing damage (hard save ends      |   |    |
|          | both, 16+)                                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Those that walk the forest:* Whenever the       |   |    |
|          | Fallen Icon becomes staggered, suffers more than |   |    |
|          | 120 damage from a single attack, or is           |   |    |
|          | critically hit, a mob of Fallen Icon mooks will  |   |    |
|          | join the battle nearby the triggering enemy.     |   |    |
|          | While these creatures are in play, the Fallen    |   |    |
|          | Icon has a bonus to all defenses equal to the    |   |    |
|          | number of Fallen Icon mobs in the battle.        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Seeds on the wind:* If the Fallen Icon is       |   |    |
|          | slain, the GM secretly rolls a normal save (11+) |   |    |
|          | at the end of *each session*, including this     |   |    |
|          | one. If the save succeeds, the Fallen Icon       |   |    |
|          | returns to life near where it fell or in some    |   |    |
|          | distant wilderness. If the campaign somehow ends |   |    |
|          | while the Fallen Icon is still dead, it's the    |   |    |
|          | GM's call whether the Fallen Icon stays dead or  |   |    |
|          | rises after the events of the campaign.          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier special]{.underline}                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Omnivorous:* When a creature engaged with or    |   |    |
|          | next to the Fallen Icon dies (including the last |   |    |
|          | mook of a mob), the Fallen Icon consumes it and  |   |    |
|          | regains 100 HP.                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

First PC campaign victory: Remove the Fallen Icon's *natural supremacy*
ability.

Second PC campaign victory: *Angry sky* only triggers when the
escalation die is even.

Third PC campaign victory: Remove the *seeds on the wind* ability.

Fourth PC campaign victory: Remove the 60 damage dealt by the
*ambulatory landscape* ability.

[Mook Squads]{.underline}

When *those that walk the forest* is triggered, roll 1d4+2 for the
number of mooks in the mob. Then roll a d6 to determine which mooks join
the battle; 1--2: fanatical druid circle; 3: frenzied wolf pack; 4:
militant ranger squad; 5: opportunistic orc band; 6: treant avenger.

Remember that starting a battle with these mooks in play makes the
Fallen Icon tougher thanks to the defense bonus that's part of *those
that walk the forest*.

#### Frenzied Wolf Pack

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 10th    | **A hundred fangs +17 vs. AC**---14 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 7 extra damage.               | * | 4 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 7 damage.                    |   | 2 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Pack tactics:* Enemies take a -5 penalty to      | * |   |
|           | disengage checks against the wolf pack.           | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Opportunistic Orc Band

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 10th    | **From all sides +13 vs. AC**---20 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 10 extra damage.              | * | 3 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 10 damage.                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 9 |
|           | *Horde tactics:* Enemies take a -5 penalty to     | * |   |
|           | disengage checks against the orc band.            | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fanatical Druid Circle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +16                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 11th    | **Thorn blades +16 vs. AC**---15 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 7 extra damage.               | * | 0 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 7 damage.                    |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | **R: Cleansing fire +16 vs. PD**---22 fire damage | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Also deal 11 ongoing fire     | D | 0 |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 11 fire damage.              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Militant Ranger Squad

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +16                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 11th    | **A hundred cuts +14 vs. AC**---15 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 7 extra damage.               | * | 4 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 7 damage.                    |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | **R: Rain of arrows +18 vs. AC**---22 damage      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 11 extra damage.              | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 11 damage.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Treant Avenger

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +15                                   | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 12th    | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Rending branches +17 vs. AC**---40 damage       | * | 8 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* 40 extra damage.                   |   | 2 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Hardwood resistance:* This creature has *resist  | * |   |
|           | damage 16+* to all damage except fire damage and  | P | 7 |
|           | melee attacks against AC, which damage it         | D | 6 |
|           | normally.                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Fallen Icon -- Undead

#### Jackal Gravewrecker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4 (+2 when physically carrying a     | * | 1 |
|           | corpse)                                           | * | 7 |
| 2nd     |                                                   | A |   |
| level     | **Claws +6 vs. PD**---3 damage, and 3 ongoing     | C | 1 |
|           | poison damage (easy save ends, 6+)                | * | 5 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **Shovel to the face +8 vs.   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | AC**---7 damage                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 18+:* With a resounding "WHANG!", the    | P | 9 |
|           | shovel leaves the target dazed until the end of   | D |   |
|           | their next turn.                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two jackal             |   |   |
|           | gravewreckers in the battle (round up), one of    | * |   |
|           | them can use *shovel to the face* once during the | * |   |
|           | battle.                                           | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Still a jackal:* When a jackal gravewrecker mook | * |   |
|           | rolls a natural 1 with an attack, its cowardly    | * |   |
|           | nature takes over and it flees, leaving the rest  |   |   |
|           | of its mob to fight on.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal Bearer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8 (+6 when physically carrying a     | * | 2 |
|           | corpse)                                           | * | 0 |
| 5th     |                                                   | A |   |
| level     | **Shovel and claws +9 vs. AC**---6 damage, and 6  | C | 1 |
|           | ongoing poison damage (easy save ends, 6+)        | * | 8 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **R: Sack full of bonegrit+9  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---10 damage, and    | * | 5 |
|           | target must roll an extra d20 for its next attack | * |   |
|           | and use the lower roll                            | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two jackal             | * |   |
|           | gravewreckers in the battle (round up), one of    | * |   |
|           | them can use *sack full of bonegrit* as a free    |   |   |
|           | action once during the battle.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal Scout

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Short spear or dagger +10 vs. AC**---14 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Shortbow, nasty arrow +10 vs. AC**---14      | * | 8 |
| Archer    | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even hit:* The scout can take an         | * | 6 |
|           | additional move action this turn.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* Speedy reload. If not engaged, | D | 6 |
|           | the scout can make a second attack against a      | * |   |
|           | different nearby enemy as a free action.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Rally:* As a quick action, the jackal scout      | * |   |
|           | attempts to rally its fellows. Roll a normal      | * |   |
|           | save. If the save succeeds, add a 5th level     | M |   |
|           | jackal bearer mook to the battle somewhere nearby | D |   |
|           | the jackal scout, either as part of an existing   | * |   |
|           | mob or as a new one-creature mob if there are no  | * |   |
|           | other jackal bearers left in the fight.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle when the escalation die   | * |   |
|           | is even.                                          | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal Mage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Obsidian scimitar +11 vs. AC**---14 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The mage can make a second    | * | 6 |
| Caster    | attack against the same target as a free action.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Breath of the dead +11 vs. PD (1 nearby or   | * | 0 |
|           | faraway enemy)**---20 negative energy damage      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                 | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Those you left behind +11 vs. MD (1 nearby   | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---28 negative energy damage, and the     | * |   |
|           | target is dazed (save ends)                       | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as the jackal mage uses  | * |   |
|           | its psychic connection with the Fallen Icon to    | * |   |
|           | show an image of the moment of death (always      |   |   |
|           | past, not future) of someone the target loved or  | * |   |
|           | someone they let down.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal Priest

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Elite    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Obsidian scimitar and terrible claws +12 vs.   | A |   |
| level    | AC (2 attacks)**---18 damage                     | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 5      | * |   |
|          | ongoing damage.                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | **R: Charnel shadow +12 vs. PD (1 or 2           | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---20 negative energy damage           | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 3 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 10 extra psychic | * | 0 |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Summon ghouls:* The jackal priest starts each   | * |   |
|          | battle accompanied by a mob of 1d4 + 1 7th     | * |   |
|          | level summoned ghoul mooks. (The mooks gained    | M |   |
|          | via this ability are accounted for in the        | D |   |
|          | building battle math by the jackal priest's      | * |   |
|          | designation as an elite monster.) At the start   | * |   |
|          | of each of the jackal priest's turns, if the     |   |   |
|          | jackal priest is not engaged, roll a d6. If you  | * |   |
|          | roll less than or equal to the escalation die,   | * |   |
|          | use the jackal priest's standard action to add   | H |   |
|          | another mob of 1d4 + 1 summoned ghoul mooks to   | P |   |
|          | the battle. The newly summoned mooks take their  | * |   |
|          | turn after the jackal priest's turn. Stop        | * |   |
|          | rolling the d6 after the ability has triggered   |   |   |
|          | to summon the second mob of ghoul mooks.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Elite:* When building battles with this         |   |   |
|          | monster, it counts as 1.5 of a monster at 7th  |   |   |
|          | level.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Last breath:* As the jackal priest drops to 0   |   |   |
|          | hp, she can use *summon ghouls* as a free        |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Summoned Ghoul

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14 (or immediately after summoner if | * | 2 |
|           | summoned during a battle)                         | * | 4 |
| 7th     |                                                   | A |   |
| level     | Vulnerability: holy                               | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| Mook      | **Wicked claws +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7       | * |   |
|           | damage, and the target is vulnerable (save ends)  |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal High Mage

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Obsidian scimitar +14 vs. AC**---37 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The mage can make a second   | * | 9 |
| Caster   | attack against the same target as a free action. | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **R: Breath of the dead +14 vs. PD (1 or 2       | * | 3 |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies)**---40 negative       | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Death's grasp +15 vs. PD (1 random nearby   |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---50 negative energy damage, and the    | * |   |
|          | target feels death's presence (save ends)        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Each failed save:* The target takes 5 negative  | D |   |
|          | energy damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Warding:* When an enemy hits the jackal high    |   |   |
|          | mage with a melee attack, that enemy takes 15    | * |   |
|          | ongoing negative energy damage.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Greater Summoned Ghoul

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18 (or immediately after summoner   | * | 2 |
|          | if summoned during a battle)                     | * | 7 |
| 10th   |                                                  | A |   |
| level    | Vulnerability: holy                              | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Mook     | **Wicked claws +16 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15     | * |   |
|          | damage, and the target is vulnerable (save ends) |   | 1 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jackal High Priest

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | **Morningstar of reckoning +15 vs. AC**---70     | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Leader   | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **R: Charnel wind +15 vs. PD (1 or 2 nearby or   | * | 4 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---88 negative energy damage   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The high priest can make a *cull  | D | 3 |
|          | the weak* attack as a free action.               | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Cull the weak +15 vs. |   |   |
|          | MD (1 nearby enemy)**---15 psychic damage, and   | * |   |
|          | any ghoul or ghast attacking the target gains a  | * |   |
|          | +5 attack bonus until the start of the priest's  | M |   |
|          | next turn                                        | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Summon ghouls:* The jackal high priest starts   | * |   |
|          | each battle accompanied by a mob of 1d6 + 1 10th |   |   |
|          | level greater summoned ghoul mooks. (The mooks   | * |   |
|          | gained via this ability are accounted for in the | * |   |
|          | building battle math by the jackal priest's      | H |   |
|          | designation as a double-strength monster.) At    | P |   |
|          | the start of each of the jackal priest's turns,  | * |   |
|          | (whether or not the jackal high priest is        | * |   |
|          | engaged!) roll a d6. If you roll less than or    |   |   |
|          | equal to the escalation die, use the jackal      |   |   |
|          | priest's standard action to add another mob of   |   |   |
|          | 1d6 + 1 greater summoned ghoul mooks to the      |   |   |
|          | battle. The newly summoned mooks take their turn |   |   |
|          | after the jackal high priest's turn. Stop        |   |   |
|          | rolling the d6 after the ability has triggered   |   |   |
|          | to summon the second mob of ghoul mooks.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | if the target has 72 hp or fewer, it's dazed     |   |   |
|          | (--4 attack) and does not add the escalation die |   |   |
|          | to its attacks.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Last rites:* When a jackal high priest drops to |   |   |
|          | 0 hp, each creature that isn't allied with it    |   |   |
|          | must roll a hard save (16+). On a failure, it    |   |   |
|          | takes 12 psychic damage.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | In addition, the high priest can use summon      |   |   |
|          | ghouls as a free action.                         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fallen Icon's Maw

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | **Tongue strike + 17 vs. AC (1 nearby            | A | 25 |
| level    | enemy)**---150 damage, and 50 ongoing negative   | C |    |
|          | energy damage                                    | * | 25 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Roll a second or     |   | 10 |
| Undead   | third *tongue strike* against a different enemy. | * | 80 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **R: Charnel storm +15 vs. MD (up to 3 nearby or | P |    |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---120 psychic      | D |    |
|          | damage, and 30 ongoing negative energy damage    | * |    |
|          | (hard save ends)                                 | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Crit:* The target is vulnerable (save ends).    | M |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | **C: Snapping jaws +15 vs. PD (1 nearby          | * |    |
|          | enemy)**---180 damage, and the target is         | * |    |
|          | weakened (hard save end, 16+)                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                         | P |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **Charnel breath +15 vs. PD (each enemy engaged  | * |    |
|          | with it)**---50 damage                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Empowered by death:* When the last mook in a    |   |    |
|          | mob is slain nearby, or when a creature drops to |   |    |
|          | 0 hit points or dies in some other fashion       |   |    |
|          | nearby, the Fallen Icon's Maw heals hit point    |   |    |
|          | equal to 10 × the creature (or mob's) level.     |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Sweeping shadow:* If the Fallen Icon's Maw is   |   |    |
|          | slain, the GM secretly rolls a normal save (11+) |   |    |
|          | at the end of *each session*, including this     |   |    |
|          | one. If the save succeeds, the Fallen Icon       |   |    |
|          | regains a semblance of life: the Fallen Icon's   |   |    |
|          | Shadow, the 13th level creature statted just   |   |    |
|          | below, returns to life with attendant high       |   |    |
|          | priests and mages. If the campaign somehow ends  |   |    |
|          | while the Fallen Icon's Maw and Fallen Icon's    |   |    |
|          | Shadow are dead, well, it's not *really* dead,   |   |    |
|          | is it?                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |    |
|          | if the target has 120 hp or fewer, it's dazed    |   |    |
|          | (--4 attack) and does not add the escalation die |   |    |
|          | to its attacks.                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Fallen Icon's Shadow

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +22                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 13th   | **Great leeching +18 vs. PD**---110 negative     | A |   |
| level    | energy damage, and Fallen Icon's Shadow heals    | C | 2 |
|          | 2d6 × 10 hit points                              | * | 6 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd roll:* Target also takes 50 ongoing |   | 2 |
| Undead   | negative energy damage.                          | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Fanged shadows +18 vs. MD (1d4 nearby       | P | 8 |
|          | enemies)**---140 psychic damage, and target is   | D | 0 |
|          | dazed (save ends)                                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 40 ongoing psychic damage.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Empowered by death:* When the last mook in a    | * |   |
|          | mob is slain nearby, or when a creature drops to | M |   |
|          | 0 hit points or dies in some other fashion       | D |   |
|          | nearby, the Fallen Icon's Shadow heals hit point | * |   |
|          | equal to 10 × the creature (or mob's) level.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Open maw:* When the escalation die reaches 6,   | * |   |
|          | the battle ends as a campaign loss for the       | * |   |
|          | player characters. The first consequence of the  | H |   |
|          | loss is that the Fallen Icon's Shadow disappears | P |   |
|          | and the Fallen Icon's Maw returns to life at     | * |   |
|          | some other distant location. Perhaps there is no | * |   |
|          | other terrible consequence. Perhaps that's       |   |   |
|          | enough.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | if the target has 144 hp or fewer, it's dazed    |   |   |
|          | (--4 attack) and does not add the escalation die |   |   |
|          | to its attacks.                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

First PC campaign victory: The Fallen Icon's Maw's *tongue strike*
attack is now limited to a second attack with no chance of a third
attack, even if the second attack is a natural even roll.

Second PC campaign victory: Remove the *snapping jaws* attack.

Third PC campaign victory: Remove the *charnel breath* attack.

Fourth PC campaign victory: Remove the *sweeping shadow* ability.

### Fallen Icon -- Underground

#### Gray Hoarder

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | **Greedy claws +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---11       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Wrecker   | *Crit:* The target loses the use of a random      | * |   |
|           | heroic-tier true magic item that the gray hoarder |   | 1 |
| Undead    | magically wrests away. The item can only be       | * | 4 |
|           | retrieved as a standard action from the body of   | * |   |
|           | the slain gray hoarder.                           | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           | *Scent of treasure:* The gray hoarder's crit      | * |   |
|           | range expands by the number of heroic-tier true   | * |   |
|           | magic items that the target is attuned to.        |   |   |
|           | (Targets with more of these items are preferred   | * |   |
|           | prey.)                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Mine forever:* If the gray hoarder starts its    | D |   |
|           | turn next to a fallen enemy, it will spend a      | * |   |
|           | quick action to pick up a random magic item or    | * |   |
|           | implement belonging to that enemy. The gray       |   |   |
|           | hoarder will then attempt to disengage (if        | * |   |
|           | necessary) and move as quickly as possible from   | * |   |
|           | the battle without taking opportunity attacks.    | H |   |
|           | (*Mine Forever* is also triggered when acquiring  | P |   |
|           | an item by scoring a critical hit.)               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Necromantic resistance:* The gray hoarder has    |   |   |
|           | *resist negative energy 16+*, as well as a +2     |   |   |
|           | bonus to defenses and saves against attacks and   |   |   |
|           | effects that specifically target undead.          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gray Raider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Greedy iron claws +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---9   | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | *Crit:* The target loses use of a random true     | * |   |
|           | magic item as the raider wrests it away. The item |   | 1 |
| Undead    | can be retrieved as a standard action from the    | * | 7 |
|           | body of the slain gray raider.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Scent of treasure:* The gray raider's crit range | D | 0 |
|           | expands by the number of true magic items of      | * |   |
|           | champion-tier that the target is carrying.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Glittering Bearer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **R: Lash the thief +13 vs. MD (one nearby or     | A |   |
| level     | faraway enemy)**---12 psychic damage, plus 6      | C | 1 |
|           | psychic damage for each true magic item of        | * | 6 |
| Caster    | champion tier that the target is carrying         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Undead    | **C: Weight of wealth +13 vs. PD (one nearby      | * | 1 |
|           | enemy wearing magic armor)**---The target is      | * |   |
|           | stuck and weakened (save ends)                    | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | **R: The Icon's due +13 vs. PD (One nearby enemy  | * |   |
|           | wielding a magical weapon, implement, or          | * |   |
|           | shield)**---The target must choose one: 30 damage |   |   |
|           | and the target teleports to become engaged with a | * |   |
|           | creature nearby the glittering bearer; OR the     | * |   |
|           | target loses a random magical implement, shield,  | M |   |
|           | or weapon to the glittering bearer until the      | D |   |
|           | bearer is slain                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited flight:* The glittering bearer normally  | * |   |
|           | hovers a foot or two off the ground, and can      | H |   |
|           | glide over obstacles.                             | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+*  | * |   |
|           | to all damage except force damage, which damages  |   |   |
|           | it normally. A glittering bearer can move through |   |   |
|           | solid objects but it can't end its movement       |   |   |
|           | inside them.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      |   |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bronze Errant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Whistling double-headed axe +10 vs. AC (2      | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---40 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Blocker  | **R: Returning axe +10 vs. AC (one nearby or     | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---40 damage                     |   | 1 |
| C        |                                                  | * | 8 |
| onstruct | **C: Gleaming perfection +10 vs. MD (one nearby  | * |   |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---The target must use its    | P | 2 |
|          | next move action to move closer to the bronze    | D | 8 |
|          | errant                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* When an enemy not engaged with    |   |   |
|          | the bronze errant rolls a natural odd attack     | * |   |
|          | roll against it, the bronze errant can make a    | * |   |
|          | *gleaming perfection* attack against that enemy  | M |   |
|          | as a free action.                                | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Armor supremacy:* Enemies engaged with the      | * |   |
|          | bronze errant and wearing magical heavy armor    |   |   |
|          | who roll a natural odd attack are vulnerable     | * |   |
|          | until the start of their next turn, as they      | * |   |
|          | exaggeratedly act out their armor's quirk.       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Perfect immunity:* Bronze errants are immune to | * |   |
|          | effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,          | * |   |
|          | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing |   |   |
|          | damage. You can damage one, but that's about it. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Screaming Hoardling

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Magic axe and hammer +12 vs. AC (2             | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---13 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Troop    | *Natural 1-3:* The screaming hoardling drops its | * |   |
|          | weapon and makes a *howl of emptiness* attack as |   | 1 |
| Undead   | a free action.                                   | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Returning axe or hammer +12 vs. AC**---13   | P | 1 |
|          | damage                                           | D | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural 1-3:* The *screaming hoardling* drops   | * |   |
|          | its weapon and makes a *howl of emptiness*       |   |   |
|          | attack                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Special use only:                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **C: Howl of emptiness +12 vs. MD (each nearby   | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---10 psychic damage                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Effect:* The screaming hoardling is dazed and   | * |   |
|          | vulnerable until the start of its next turn as   | * |   |
|          | it scrambles for its 'lost treasure', the weapon | H |   |
|          | it just dropped.                                 | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Piecemeal armor:* When the screaming hoardling  | * |   |
|          | survives a critical hit to AC it makes a *howl   |   |   |
|          | of emptiness* attack as a free action, as a      |   |   |
|          | piece of its scavenged armor falls away. Knock a |   |   |
|          | point off its AC.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Eternal greed:* If the screaming hoardling is   |   |   |
|          | reduced to zero HP while coping with the effects |   |   |
|          | of its *howl of emptiness* attack, at the start  |   |   |
|          | of the next turn it rises with 36 HP, then       |   |   |
|          | spends a quick action (or two) to re-equip lost  |   |   |
|          | items. A character can negate this               |   |   |
|          | recovery-from-death by returning a lost item to  |   |   |
|          | the corpse with a quick action. If a character   |   |   |
|          | has for some reason taken the screaming          |   |   |
|          | hoardling's fallen treasure, they will find      |   |   |
|          | themselves pursued by an unkillable enemy until  |   |   |
|          | they give that item back.                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bronze Kingsguard

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | **Whistling axe +13 vs. AC**---55 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **R: Returning axe +10 vs. AC (one nearby or     | * | 3 |
| Blocker  | faraway enemy)**---55 damage                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| C        | **C: Gleaming perfection +13 vs. MD (one nearby  | * | 1 |
| onstruct | or faraway enemy)**---The target must use its    | * |   |
|          | next move action to move closer to the bronze    | P | 2 |
|          | errant                                           | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Limited use:* When an enemy not engaged with    | * |   |
|          | the bronze kingsguard rolls a natural odd attack |   |   |
|          | roll against it, the bronze kingsguard can make  | * |   |
|          | a *gleaming perfection* attack against that      | * |   |
|          | enemy as a free action.                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Armor supremacy:* Engaged enemies wearing       | * |   |
|          | magical heavy armor who roll an odd attack roll  | * |   |
|          | are vulnerable until the start of their next     |   |   |
|          | turn, as they exaggeratedly act out their        | * |   |
|          | armor's quirk.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Perfect immunity:* Bronze kingsguards are       | P |   |
|          | immune to effects. They can't be dazed,          | * |   |
|          | weakened, confused, made vulnerable, or touched  | * |   |
|          | by ongoing damage. You can damage one, but       |   |   |
|          | that's about it.                                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Loyal Gatherer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Grasping iron claws +15 vs. AC**---30 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Crit:* The target loses use of one random epic  | * | 4 |
| Mook     | tier true magic item. The item can be retrieved  | * |   |
|          | as a standard action from a slain loyal          |   | 2 |
| Undead   | gatherer.                                        | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Scent of treasure:* The loyal gatherer's crit   | P | 4 |
|          | range expands by number of true magic items of   | D | 5 |
|          | epic tier the target is carrying. Targets with   | * |   |
|          | more of these items are preferred prey.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Royal Bearer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **R: Lash for thieves +17 vs. MD (one nearby or  | A |   |
| level    | faraway enemy)**---40 psychic damage, plus 8     | C | 1 |
|          | psychic damage for each true magic item of epic  | * | 9 |
| Caster   | tier the target is carrying                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | **C: Crushing weight of wealth +17 vs. PD (one   | * | 5 |
|          | nearby enemy wearing magic armor)**---32 force   | * |   |
|          | damage and the target is stuck and weakened      | P | 1 |
|          | until the start of the royal bearer's next turn  | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: The Icon's due +17 vs. PD (nearby enemy     | * |   |
|          | wielding a magical weapon, implement, or         |   |   |
|          | shield)**---The target must choose one: 60       | * |   |
|          | damage and the target can be teleported into     | * |   |
|          | engagement with one of the royal bearer's        | M |   |
|          | allies; OR the target loses a random magical     | D |   |
|          | implement, shield, or weapon to the glittering   | * |   |
|          | bearer                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* No choice, the target        | * |   |
|          | suffers both effects.                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The glittering bearer normally hovers  | * |   |
|          | a foot or two off the ground, though it can      |   |   |
|          | achieve impressive elevation and mobility if     |   |   |
|          | need be.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make     |   |   |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+* |   |   |
|          | to all damage except force damage, which damages |   |   |
|          | it normally. A glittering bearer can move        |   |   |
|          | through solid objects but it can't end its       |   |   |
|          | movement inside them.                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fallen Icon -- Underground

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| 3×       | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 30 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 13th   | **Hammer of golden sovereignty +18 vs. AC (up to | A | 27 |
| level    | 3 enemies)**---90 damage                         | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 27 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free and     | * |    |
|          | takes extra damage equal to the attack roll.     |   | 12 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 00 |
| erration | *First natural even miss each round if targeting | * |    |
|          | one or two enemies:* The Fallen Icon makes       | P |    |
|          | another *hammer of golden sovereignty* attack    | D |    |
|          | against the enemy it missed.                     | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **C: Behind the mask +18 vs. MD (one nearby      |   |    |
|          | enemy)**---160 psychic damage and the target is  | * |    |
|          | weakened (save ends)                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Miss:* 80 psychic damage and the target is      | D |    |
|          | weakened until the end of its next turn.         | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Golden greed +18 vs.  |   |    |
|          | MD (one nearby enemy)**---The target is confused | * |    |
|          | (save ends)                                      | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Limited use:* When a nearby enemy uses the      | P |    |
|          | magic item power of an epic tier item, the       | * |    |
|          | Fallen Icon may make a *golden greed* attack     | * |    |
|          | against 1d4 other nearby enemies as a free       |   |    |
|          | action. (It's possible the PCs should have some  |   |    |
|          | warning, for example, a magic item might be      |   |    |
|          | too-eagerly wheedling to be used. Or maybe you'd |   |    |
|          | rather teach lessons the hard way.)              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *The mask slips:* When first staggered, the      |   |    |
|          | Fallen Icon makes a *behind the mask* attack     |   |    |
|          | against the enemy that caused the triggering     |   |    |
|          | damage as a free action.                         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *The wandering king:* The Fallen Icon can deal   |   |    |
|          | 4d6 damage to itself and teleport someplace it   |   |    |
|          | can see nearby as a move action.                 |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Sticks and rags:* The Fallen Icon has *resist   |   |    |
|          | damage 16+* to attacks not made with epic-tier   |   |    |
|          | magical weapons, implements, or bracers. Enemies |   |    |
|          | not wearing epic-tier magical armor are          |   |    |
|          | vulnerable to its *hammer of golden sovereignty* |   |    |
|          | attacks (that's right---eschewing magic items    |   |    |
|          | makes it easier to defeat the minions of the     |   |    |
|          | Fallen Icon, but harder to beat the Fallen Icon  |   |    |
|          | itself).                                         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Even worse:* When the escalation die is even,   |   |    |
|          | the Fallen Icon rolls 2d20 instead of 1d20 and   |   |    |
|          | uses the higher result whenever it attacks or    |   |    |
|          | rolls a save.                                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | Fallen icon: The Fallen Icon is no longer an     |   |    |
|          | icon, but it still possesses magical bonds with  |   |    |
|          | reality that make it difficult to destroy. See   |   |    |
|          | the Campaign Impact section immediately          |   |    |
|          | following the Fallen Icon's stat block for ways  |   |    |
|          | in which significant campaign victories can make |   |    |
|          | the Fallen Icon easier to defeat. (To be clear:  |   |    |
|          | if the PCs don't achieve any of these campaign   |   |    |
|          | victories, the Fallen Icon will be difficult or  |   |    |
|          | perhaps even impossible to destroy.)             |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Compel fealty:* An epic-tier dwarf, forgeborn,  |   |    |
|          | or human slain by the Fallen Icon will arise at  |   |    |
|          | the end of the battle as a bronze kingsguard,    |   |    |
|          | loyal gatherer, or royal bearer---whichever      |   |    |
|          | seems most appropriate.                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Eternal kingdom:* If the Fallen Icon King is    |   |    |
|          | slain, the GM secretly rolls a normal save (11+) |   |    |
|          | at the end of *each session*, including this     |   |    |
|          | one. If the save succeeds, the Fallen Icon       |   |    |
|          | returns to life in one of its secret treasure    |   |    |
|          | rooms deep in the underworld. If the campaign    |   |    |
|          | somehow ends while the Fallen Icon is still      |   |    |
|          | dead, it's the GM's call whether the Fallen Icon |   |    |
|          | stays dead or rises after the events of the      |   |    |
|          | campaign.                                        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Fealty owed:* Human, dwarf, and forgeborn       |   |    |
|          | characters may not use their racial power until  |   |    |
|          | the escalation die reaches 4 or higher, and not  |   |    |
|          | when engaged with the Fallen Icon (so standard   |   |    |
|          | humans are simply out of luck).                  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Fealty shown:* The first time each round an     |   |    |
|          | attack would reduce the Fallen Icon to zero hit  |   |    |
|          | points or less, it instead damages the closest   |   |    |
|          | nearby loyal gatherer. If these have all been    |   |    |
|          | destroyed, the attack damages the closest nearby |   |    |
|          | royal bearer, then finally the closest bronze    |   |    |
|          | kingsguard. If these have all been destroyed,    |   |    |
|          | the Fallen Icon is reduced to zero hit           |   |    |
|          | points---but see *long live the icon* below.     |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Long Live the Icon:* When the Fallen Icon is    |   |    |
|          | finally defeated, nothing remains but a          |   |    |
|          | featureless gold mask that wants to be picked    |   |    |
|          | up. This mask makes a *golden greed* attack      |   |    |
|          | against each enemy in the battle as a free       |   |    |
|          | action. The save to end the confusion from this  |   |    |
|          | attack is a hard save, with confused targets     |   |    |
|          | violently fighting over the mask. When no        |   |    |
|          | targets are confused, the mask crumbles into     |   |    |
|          | dust. (If one PC slays the others while          |   |    |
|          | confused, they're probably going to put on the   |   |    |
|          | mask.)                                           |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

First PC campaign victory: Remove the Fallen Icon's *eternal kingdom*
ability.

Second PC campaign victory: Remove *even worse*, and ignore any nastier
specials even if you are a nasty GM.

Third PC campaign victory: Reduce the Fallen Icon's defenses by 2.

Fourth PC campaign victory: Remove *the wandering king*.

### Faun

[Ability for all fauns: destiny]{.underline}

Fauns who are likely to end up in a fight choose one of two paths. The
paths determine which of their defenses will be higher, and in some
cases determine an additional ability or two.

*Path of the Sword:* More martial-minded, these fauns are usually
warriors, thieves, and hunters. They have a higher Physical Defense
(PD).

*Path of Song:* Magically-inclined, these fauns are usually bards,
magicians, priests, or druids. They have a higher Mental Defense (MD).

#### Faun Troubadour

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +5                                 | * | 16    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 2nd    | **C: Heckle +7 vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies in  | A | 15 or |
| level    | a group)**---5 psychic damage                 | C | 13    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 18+:* Target is hampered (easy save  | * | 13 or |
|          | ends).                                        |   | 15    |
| Humanoid |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Limited use:* Cannot be used on two          | * | 36    |
|          | consecutive rounds.                           | P |       |
|          |                                               | D |       |
|          | **Bob and weave and headbutt +7 vs. AC**---6  | * |       |
|          | damage                                        | * |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Miss:* The troubadour pops free.             | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | M |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | D |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Gang                  | * |       |
|          | leader*---Creatures hit by *heckle* are       |   |       |
|          | vulnerable to attack by the troubadour's      | * |       |
|          | allies until the start of the troubadour's    | * |       |
|          | next turn.                                    | H |       |
|          |                                               | P |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Throw your                 | * |       |
|          | voice*---Targets of *heckle* may not attack   | * |       |
|          | the troubadour until the end of their next    |   |       |
|          | turn.                                         |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Nice one!:* If an enemy rolls a natural 1 on |   |       |
|          | an attack against the faun troubadour, use    |   |       |
|          | *heckle* as a free action, but only against   |   |       |
|          | the triggering enemy. This does not count as  |   |       |
|          | a use of *heckle*.                            |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The troubadour gains the      |   |       |
|          | other *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its    |   |       |
|          | lower defense.                                |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Harrier

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +8                                 | * | 19    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 4th    | **Hatchet +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---6 damage  | A | 18 or |
| level    |                                               | C | 14    |
|          | **R: Pinning shot +9 vs. AC (one nearby or    | * |       |
| Archer   | faraway enemy)**---15 damage                  | * | 14 or |
|          |                                               |   | 18    |
| Humanoid | *Natural 18+:* The target is stuck (save      | * |       |
|          | ends).                                        | * | 48    |
|          |                                               | P |       |
|          | *Natural 2--4:* Reroll the attack against a   | D |       |
|          | random nearby creature.                       | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  |   |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Barbed                | M |       |
|          | arrowhead*---*Pinning shot* deals 1d6 extra   | D |       |
|          | damage on a natural even hit.                 | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Entangling arrows*---On a  |   |       |
|          | natural odd hit with *pinning shot*, the      | * |       |
|          | target is hampered until the end of its next  | * |       |
|          | turn. The target or an adjacent creature may  | H |       |
|          | spend a standard action to remove this        | P |       |
|          | effect.                                       | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The harrier gains the other   |   |       |
|          | *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its lower    |   |       |
|          | defense.                                      |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Bandleader

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +8                                 | * | 23    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 5th    | **R: Horn of power +8 vs. PD (all nearby      | A | 15 or |
| level    | enemies)**---5 thunder damage                 | C | 19    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| Leader   | *Natural 18+:* One ally engaged with targeted | * | 19 or |
|          | enemy can make an attack as an interrupt      |   | 15    |
| Humanoid | action.                                       | * |       |
|          |                                               | * | 52    |
|          | **Baton of office +11 vs. AC**---17 damage    | P |       |
|          |                                               | D |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | * |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | * |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Allegro*---Allies     | * |       |
|          | gain a +4 bonus to initiative.                | * |       |
|          |                                               | M |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Fanfare*---If *horn of     | D |       |
|          | power* misses all targets, two nearby allies  | * |       |
|          | may roll one saving throw each as a free      | * |       |
|          | action.                                       |   |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 | * |       |
|          |                                               | H |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The bandleader gains the      | P |       |
|          | other *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its    | * |       |
|          | lower defense.                                | * |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Keeper

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +6                                 | * | 22    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 5th    | **Gnarled staff +10 vs. AC**---15 damage      | A | 15 or |
| level    |                                               | C | 18    |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 5 damage.                | * |       |
| Blocker  |                                               | * | 18 or |
|          | **C: Snare +10 vs. PD (one nearby enemy       |   | 15    |
| Humanoid | engaged with an ally)**---15 damage, and the  | * |       |
|          | target pops free from the keeper's ally       | * | 70    |
|          |                                               | P |       |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The keeper engages the target. | D |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | * |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            |   |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Sweep the leg*---On a | * |       |
|          | natural odd hit with *gnarled staff*, the     | M |       |
|          | target loses its next move action.            | D |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Thorny whip*---If the      | * |       |
|          | natural roll with *snare* is above the        |   |       |
|          | target's Constitution, it deals additional    | * |       |
|          | ongoing poison damage equal to twice the      | * |       |
|          | escalation die (save ends).                   | H |       |
|          |                                               | P |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The keeper gains the other    |   |       |
|          | *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its lower    |   |       |
|          | defense.                                      |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Enchanter

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +8                                 | * | 21    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 6th    | **Swift hoof +11 vs. AC**---18 damage, and    | A | 17 or |
| level    | the enchanter pops free from the target       | C | 20    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| Spoiler  | **R: Whispered sonata +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby  | * | 20 or |
|          | enemies)**---11 psychic damage                |   | 17    |
| Humanoid |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Crit:* The target is dazed (save ends).      | * | 88    |
|          |                                               | P |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | D |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Shin kick*---On a     |   |       |
|          | natural even hit with *swift hoof*, the       | * |       |
|          | target is hampered until the end of           | * |       |
|          | enchanter's next turn.                        | M |       |
|          |                                               | D |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Lullaby*---On a critical   | * |       |
|          | hit with *whispered sonata*, the target must  | * |       |
|          | begin making last gasp saves instead of being |   |       |
|          | dazed. On the fourth failure, it falls        | * |       |
|          | unconscious.                                  | * |       |
|          |                                               | H |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 | P |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The enchanter gains the other | * |       |
|          | destiny *benefit*, and adds 1 to its lower    |   |       |
|          | defense.                                      |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Outlaw

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +12                                | * | 23    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 7th    | **Thief's dagger +12 vs. AC**---24 damage     | A | 21 or |
| level    |                                               | C | 18    |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The outlaw also steals a       | * |       |
| Troop    | random consumable magic item or wealth of     | * | 18 or |
|          | equivalent value from the target.             |   | 21    |
| Humanoid |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Feint & dodge +11 vs. PD**---The target is  | * | 92    |
|          | stuck until the end of its next turn          | P |       |
|          |                                               | D |       |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target instead loses all   | * |       |
|          | actions during its next turn and does nothing | * |       |
|          | as it gets tangled up.                        |   |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle, as a move action.    | * |       |
|          |                                               | M |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | D |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | * |       |
|          |                                               | * |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Sucker                |   |       |
|          | punch*---*Feint & dodge* now deals 7 damage   | * |       |
|          | on a miss.                                    | * |       |
|          |                                               | H |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Blink*---*Thief's dagger*  | P |       |
|          | can be used against a nearby enemy if the     | * |       |
|          | outlaw is not engaged. It does not provoke    | * |       |
|          | opportunity attacks.                          |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The outlaw gains the other    |   |       |
|          | *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its lower    |   |       |
|          | defense.                                      |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Fleet of foot:* Faun outlaws that flee from  |   |       |
|          | battle are quick and boosted with magic       |   |       |
|          | that's all about escape. Pursuers must have   |   |       |
|          | some powerful magic or iconic advantage to    |   |       |
|          | have a chance of catching them.               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

#### Faun Ranger

+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
| Normal   | Initiative +13                                | * | 22    |
|          |                                               | * |       |
| 7th    | **Longsword +12 vs. AC**---20 damage          | A | 21 or |
| level    |                                               | C | 17    |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Make a second     | * |       |
| Archer   | *longsword* attack, but ignore this trigger   | * | 17 or |
|          | for the second attack.                        |   | 21    |
| Humanoid |                                               | * |       |
|          | **R: Pinning shot +13 vs. AC (two attacks vs. | * | 90    |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies)**---15 damage      | P |       |
|          |                                               | D |       |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target is stuck (save      | * |       |
|          | ends).                                        | * |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Destiny:* Choose either *Path of the Sword*  | * |       |
|          | or *Path of Song*.                            | * |       |
|          |                                               | M |       |
|          | **Path of the Sword:** *Barbed                | D |       |
|          | arrowhead*---*Pinning shot* deals 1d12 extra  | * |       |
|          | damage on a natural even hit.                 | * |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | **Path of Song:** *Entangling arrows*---On a  | * |       |
|          | natural odd hit with *pinning shot*, the      | * |       |
|          | target is hampered until the end of its next  | H |       |
|          | turn. The target or an adjacent creature may  | P |       |
|          | spend a standard action to remove this        | * |       |
|          | effect.                                       | * |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                 |   |       |
|          |                                               |   |       |
|          | *Full destiny:* The ranger gains the other    |   |       |
|          | *destiny* benefit, and adds 1 to its lower    |   |       |
|          | defense.                                      |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+
|          |                                               |   |       |
+----------+-----------------------------------------------+---+-------+

### Flower of Unlife

All flowers of unlife have a nastier special available called *Iconic
energy drain*. When a PC is associated with an icon that is also
associated with the flower of unlife (e.g. undead or nature icons), and
they roll a natural 1--5 with an attack against the flower, the attacker
takes 2d6 damage and the flower heals that many hit points.

#### Blood Rose

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Fangs in the blossoms +11 vs. AC**---20 damage | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes 10 ongoing   |   | 2 |
| Plant    | damage.                                          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 5 ongoing damage.            | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 1 |
|          | *Bristling thorns:* When a creature makes a      | * | 0 |
|          | melee attack against the blood rose, that        | * |   |
|          | creature takes damage equal to its natural       |   |   |
|          | attack roll.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Black-gray resurgence:* When the blood rose     | M |   |
|          | drops to 0 hit points, it is destroyed until the | D |   |
|          | start of its next turn. At the start of its next | * |   |
|          | turn, it returns to life as a death blossom or   | * |   |
|          | lich flower that lacks the *red-yellow           |   |   |
|          | resurrection* ability but is otherwise undamaged | * |   |
|          | and whole.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Death Blossom

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Sapping touch +11 vs. AC**---16 negative       | * | 9 |
| Caster   | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Natural 4, 8, 12, 16, or 20:* The target is     | * | 7 |
|          | weakened (save ends).                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Unlife ray +11 vs. PD**---24 negative       | D | 0 |
|          | energy damage                                    | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes 1d6 extra    |   |   |
|          | negative energy damage for each unexpended       | * |   |
|          | recovery it has.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* If the target currently has  | D |   |
|          | less than its maximum recoveries, it gains a     | * |   |
|          | recovery! Gaining a recovery is not healing, but | * |   |
|          | it can use that recovery later to heal as        |   |   |
|          | normal.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Red-yellow resurrection:* When the death        | H |   |
|          | blossom drops to 0 hit points, it's destroyed    | P |   |
|          | until the start of its next turn. At the start   | * |   |
|          | of its next turn, it returns to life as a blood  | * |   |
|          | rose or poison dandelion that lacks the          |   |   |
|          | *black-gray resurgence* ability but is otherwise |   |   |
|          | undamaged and whole.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lich Flower

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Contact dust +11 vs. PD**---14 poison damage   | * | 7 |
| Blocker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 4, 8, 12, 16, or 20:* The target is     |   | 1 |
| Undead   | stuck (save ends).                               | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Strange vapors:* While engaged with the lich    | P | 1 |
|          | flower, non-undead and non-plant creatures are   | D | 0 |
|          | dazed (--4 attacks).                             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Red-yellow resurrection:* When the lich flower  |   |   |
|          | drops to 0 hit points, it's destroyed until the  | * |   |
|          | start of its next turn. At the start of its next | * |   |
|          | turn, it returns to life as a blood rose or      | M |   |
|          | poison dandelion that lacks the *black-gray      | D |   |
|          | resurgence* ability but is otherwise undamaged   | * |   |
|          | and whole.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Poison Dandelion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Green spikes +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15     | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Plant    | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes 10 ongoing   | * | 9 |
|          | poison damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **C: Whirling seeds +11 vs. AC (each nearby      | D | 1 |
|          | non-plant or non-undead creature)**---15 ongoing | * | 0 |
|          | poison damage, and undead creatures and plant    | * |   |
|          | creatures in the battle add the escalation die   |   |   |
|          | to their attacks against the target (save ends   | * |   |
|          | both)                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The poison dandelion can only use | D |   |
|          | this attack when the escalation die is odd.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Black-gray resurgence:* When the poison         |   |   |
|          | dandelion drops to 0 hit points, it's destroyed  | * |   |
|          | until the start of its next turn. At the start   | * |   |
|          | of its next turn, it returns to life as a death  | H |   |
|          | blossom or lich flower that lacks the            | P |   |
|          | *red-yellow resurrection* ability but is         | * |   |
|          | otherwise undamaged and whole.                   | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Fey

#### The Rascal

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +9                                     | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Small tool +10 vs. AC**---4 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Ankle-biters:* The rascal's opportunity attacks  | * | 4 |
| Mook      | deal 3 additional damage.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Power of a name:* This creature gains different  | * | 7 |
|           | abilities based on which name it has taken.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | *Brownie:* When the rascal rolls a natural even   | D | 1 |
|           | hit with its small tool attack, one nearby ally   | * |   |
|           | can roll a save against an effect that can be     | * |   |
|           | ended by a save.                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Boggart:* The rascal deals additional damage     | * |   |
|           | equal to the escalation die with its *small tool* | M |   |
|           | attack.                                           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Gremlin:* When the rascal gets a natural even    | * |   |
|           | roll with its small tool attack, the target takes |   |   |
|           | a --2 penalty to AC if it's wearing heavy armor   | * |   |
|           | (save ends; non-cumulative but it does apply to   | * |   |
|           | that attack).                                     | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sprite

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +11                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | **Tiny knives +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---7 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Whispered song +9 vs. MD (one nearby         | * | 5 |
| Caster    | enemy)**---14 psychic damage                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Fluttering:* The sprite flies, but never too far | * | 7 |
|           | from the ground.                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Power of a name:* This creature gains different  | D | 6 |
|           | abilities based on which name it has taken.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Pixie:* When the sprite scores a critical hit    |   |   |
|           | with its *whispered song* attack, instead of      | * |   |
|           | taking damage, the target falls unconscious (save | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Grig:* When the sprite rolls a natural odd hit   | * |   |
|           | with its *whispered song* attack, the target      | * |   |
|           | loses its next move action as it begins dancing   |   |   |
|           | uncontrollably.                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Great Hound

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative +10                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 5th    | **Savage bite +13 vs. AC**---40 damage           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Overbear +13 vs. PD**---32 damage              | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck and can't     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | make ranged attacks (save ends).                 | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Power of a name:* This creature gains different | P | 1 |
|          | abilities based on which name it has taken.      | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Barghest:* When the hound scores a critical hit | * |   |
|          | with its *savage bite* attack, it heals 20 hp.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Grim:* When the hound hits with its *savage     | * |   |
|          | bite* attack, the target is also vulnerable      | M |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Warg:* When the hound rolls a natural even miss | * |   |
|          | with its *savage bite* attack, the target takes  |   |   |
|          | half damage and the warg's rider, if any, takes  | * |   |
|          | the other half. In addition, a creature riding   | * |   |
|          | the hound deals only half damage with natural    | H |   |
|          | even misses with melee attacks.                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dire Feature:* Add a dire feature. Roll a d6.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1:** *Armor plates*---Add +2 to the dire       |   |   |
|          | animal's AC, and add +1 to its PD.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2:** *Spiky bits*---Whenever an enemy hits the |   |   |
|          | hound with a melee attack, deal 10 damage to     |   |   |
|          | that attacker.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **3:** *Carnage*---The hound's attacks that miss |   |   |
|          | deal 5 damage. When staggered, its missed        |   |   |
|          | attacks deal 10 damage.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4:** *Poison*---Savage bite also deals 10      |   |   |
|          | ongoing poison.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **5:** *Dire regeneration*---When the escalation |   |   |
|          | die is even, the hound heals 15 hp.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6:** *Fury*---While staggered, the hound gains |   |   |
|          | a +2 attack bonus and deals +4 damage, but at    |   |   |
|          | the end of each of its turns it takes 2d6        |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Pixie Knight

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +15                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 6th     | **Verdant sword +11 vs. AC**---18 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 5 ongoing    | * | 9 |
| Troop     | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Fairy bow +11 vs. AC**---18 damage           | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fluttering:* The pixie knight flies, but never   | P | 6 |
|           | too far from the ground.                          | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Dancing mote:* The pixie knight can't be         | * |   |
|           | intercepted and doesn't provoke opportunity       |   |   |
|           | attacks by moving.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Spriggan

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +10                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Scraggly fist +11 vs. AC**---15 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Limited use:* Only usable when the spriggan is   | * | 0 |
| Blocker   | at its normal size; but still usable if hampered! | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Fairy lights +11 vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies  | * | 6 |
|           | in a group)**---20 damage                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target is dazed (save ends).   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Once per battle, with an           | * |   |
|           | additional use for each critical hit scored by    |   |   |
|           | the spriggan's enemies this battle.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Giant-sized slap +11 vs. PD (each enemy engaged | M |   |
|           | with it, OR one enemy engaged with it and one     | D |   |
|           | nearby enemy)**---17 damage                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is thrown somewhere |   |   |
|           | faraway but non-harmful (like over a cliff) and   | * |   |
|           | loses its next move action.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Natural 1--3:* The target can make an            | P |   |
|           | opportunity attack against the spriggan.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* Only usable when the spriggan is   |   |   |
|           | at its larger size.                               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Hidden guardian:* If a spriggan wants to stay    |   |   |
|           | hidden in an illusory form instead of joining a   |   |   |
|           | battle, roll initiative for the spriggan as       |   |   |
|           | normal. When the spriggan "acts," by doing        |   |   |
|           | nothing, have the most perceptive PC roll a DC 25 |   |   |
|           | Wisdom check, adding +1 for each of their allies  |   |   |
|           | in the fight. On a success, the spriggan's        |   |   |
|           | illusion is pierced and the spriggan can use a    |   |   |
|           | single move action during its turn, but nothing   |   |   |
|           | else---it burned its standard action trying to    |   |   |
|           | stay hidden.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Embiggen:* When the escalation die reaches 2,    |   |   |
|           | the spriggan grows in size as a free action,      |   |   |
|           | acquiring its *giant-sized slap* attack. Note     |   |   |
|           | that as a free action, this transformation can    |   |   |
|           | take place any time, usually at the start of a    |   |   |
|           | round. If the spriggan was using its *hidden      |   |   |
|           | guardian* ability, it's not hidden anymore!       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### River-Spirit

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative +12                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Enchanting touch +12 vs. MD**---The target is  | A |   |
| level    | confused (save ends), and two other random       | C | 1 |
|          | nearby enemies take 30 psychic damage.           | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 psychic damage.                       |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **R: Otherworldly aria +12 vs. MD (2d3 nearby or | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies)**---30 psychic damage           | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 psychic damage.                       | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fear Aura:* While engaged with the              |   |   |
|          | river-spirit, enemies with 36 hp or fewer are    | * |   |
|          | dazed (--4 to attack) and do not add the         | * |   |
|          | escalation die to their attacks.                 | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Power of a name:* This creature gains different | * |   |
|          | abilities based on which name it has taken.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Siren:* When the river-spirit scores a critical | * |   |
|          | hit with *otherworldly aria*, it also stuns the  | * |   |
|          | target (save ends).                              | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Rusalka:* Targets hit by the river-spirit's     | * |   |
|          | *enchanting touch* attack must start rolling     | * |   |
|          | last gasp saves instead of being confused. On    |   |   |
|          | the fourth failure, they fall into a long sleep  |   |   |
|          | that mortals call a coma.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Banshee:* The river-spirit's *otherworldly      |   |   |
|          | aria* attack becomes haunting wail, deals        |   |   |
|          | negative energy damage, and on a natural 18+,    |   |   |
|          | the target is weakened (save ends).              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Grandmother

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative +15                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **C: Ancient spell +15 vs. PD (2 attacks against | A |   |
| level    | nearby or faraway enemies)**---88 special damage | C | 2 |
|          | (type determined by the grandmother's name)      | * | 1 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target becomes vulnerable |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | to the grandmother's type of special damage      | * | 5 |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 6 |
|          | *Power of a name:* This creature gains different | D | 0 |
|          | abilities based on which name it has taken.      | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fairy godmother:* *Ancient spell* deals force   |   |   |
|          | damage, and when the grandmother scores a        | * |   |
|          | critical hit with the attack, the target is      | * |   |
|          | weakened (save ends) and 1d4 of the              | M |   |
|          | grandmother's nearby allies heal 30 hp.          | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fate:* *Ancient spell* now targets MD and deals | * |   |
|          | psychic damage. In addition, a target hit by     |   |   |
|          | *ancient spell* can't use the escalation die     | * |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Grandmother-witch:* *Ancient spell* deals       | P |   |
|          | negative energy damage, and when grandmother     | * |   |
|          | rolls a natural even hit with *ancient spell*    | * |   |
|          | against an enemy engaged with her, she can make  |   |   |
|          | a *pestle* melee attack as a free action.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Pestle +15 vs. AC**---66 damage                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bad idea:* When a creature attacks grandmother, |   |   |
|          | it takes 1d6 × 10 damage of the grandmother's    |   |   |
|          | special type on a hit, or 1d3 × 5 damage of that |   |   |
|          | type on a miss.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* The grandmother flies somehow, either  |   |   |
|          | through a magic item or by using spells that     |   |   |
|          | have become second nature.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Fire Giant

#### Forge Wolf

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | Vulnerability: cold                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Red-hot teeth +11 vs. AC**---12 damage          | * | 0 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 12 ongoing fire damage        |   | 1 |
| Construct |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *Miss:* 6 damage                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | *Implacable:* The forge wolf gains +1 to its AC   | D | 0 |
|           | against melee attacks for each other forge wolf   | * |   |
|           | engaged with its target (max +4 AC).              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | M |   |
|           | damage.                                           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Furnace-like interior:* Whenever the last mook   | * |   |
|           | in a mob of forge wolves dies it deals 2d12 fire  | * |   |
|           | damage to anybody engaged with it at the time.    | H |   |
|           | Creatures that resist fire damage ignore this     | P |   |
|           | effect.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Giant Holy Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Burning axe +13 vs. AC**---40 damage and 20    | * | 1 |
| Troop    | ongoing fire damage                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | **C: Breath of Unyr +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby       | * | 8 |
|          | enemies in a group or one faraway enemy)**---70  | * |   |
|          | fire damage                                      | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 9 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a standard action.   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Fire aura:* Enemies engaged with a fire giant   | * |   |
|          | holy warrior at the end of their turn take fire  | * |   |
|          | damage equal to the escalation die value times   |   |   |
|          | five (0-5-10-15-25-30) if they have not taken    | * |   |
|          | fire damage since the end of their last turn.    | * |   |
|          | Enemies who resist fire damage ignore this fire  | H |   |
|          | giant's fire aura.                               | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unyr's consecration:* Once per battle, the fire |   |   |
|          | giant holy warrior gains an additional use of    |   |   |
|          | *breath of Unyr* when they become staggered.     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Giant Smith

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Burning hammer +11 vs. AC**---30 damage, and   | * | 0 |
| Caster   | 10 fire damage                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *Natural 16+ hit against a target wearing metal  | * | 9 |
|          | armor:* 20 ongoing fire damage.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Crit against a target with metal armor and/or   | D | 8 |
|          | shield:* The armor and/or shield is shattered,   | * | 0 |
|          | the target now counts as unarmored with no       | * |   |
|          | shield. Magic armors and shields get a save (12  |   |   |
|          | minus the magical AC bonus---so between 11+ for  | * |   |
|          | a +1 shield to 7+ for cursed epic +5 armor) to   | * |   |
|          | avoid shattering.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **C: Awaken the primal fire +12 vs. PD (one      | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy)**---20 ongoing fire damage         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Once the target saves against the | * |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage, until the end of the day    | * |   |
|          | each time they spend a recovery they also take   | H |   |
|          | 2d10 fire damage.                                | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 fire damage.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Reforge the firmament +12 vs. PD (1d3       |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies in a group)**---20 fire damage,   |   |   |
|          | and 15 ongoing fire damage and the target is     |   |   |
|          | stuck, save ends both.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Heat metal:* Enemies who start their turn       |   |   |
|          | nearby the fire giant smith take fire damage,    |   |   |
|          | unless they resist fire damage. If the enemy is  |   |   |
|          | wearing metal armor they take 2d6 fire damage,   |   |   |
|          | enemies wielding a metal weapon take 1d6 fire    |   |   |
|          | damage, and enemies with an offhand weapon or    |   |   |
|          | shield take 1d6 fire damage, and those with      |   |   |
|          | coins or clasps of metal take 1d4 fire           |   |   |
|          | damage---a maximum of 4d6+1d4 fire damage.       |   |   |
|          | Enemies with absolutely no metal items or        |   |   |
|          | belongings ignore this ability.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fire aura:* Enemies engaged with a fire giant   |   |   |
|          | smith at the end of their turn take fire damage  |   |   |
|          | equal to the escalation die times five           |   |   |
|          | (0-5-10-15-25-30) if they have not taken fire    |   |   |
|          | damage since the end of their last turn. Enemies |   |   |
|          | who resist fire damage ignore this fire giant's  |   |   |
|          | fire aura.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Holy blaze:* Fire attacks that miss the fire    |   |   |
|          | giant smith do not damage it and have no effect, |   |   |
|          | and the fire giant instead heals hp equal to     |   |   |
|          | twice the attacker's level.                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Giant Priest-General

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Elite    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
| Large    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| 8th    |                                                  | C | 2 |
| level    | **Spear of burning iron +14 vs. AC**---80 damage | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
| Leader   | *Miss:* 40 damage.                               |   | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Giant    | *Natural even hit or miss:* Up to three nearby   | * |   |
|          | enemies take 20 ongoing fire damage.             | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | **R: Unyr's divine fist +14 vs. AC (1d4 nearby   | * | 0 |
|          | or faraway enemies in a group)**---70 holy       | * |   |
|          | damage and 25 ongoing fire damage                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is vulnerable to fire | * |   |
|          | damage (save ends).                              | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Miss:* 35 holy damage.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Standard action when the          |   |   |
|          | escalation die is even.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Free the sacred flame:* Whenever the fire giant | H |   |
|          | priest-general makes an attack that staggers a   | P |   |
|          | target or reduces a target to 0 hp or fewer,     | * |   |
|          | each non-mook fire giant in the battle heals 25  | * |   |
|          | hp.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Superior fire aura:* Enemies engaged with a     |   |   |
|          | fire giant at the end of their turn take fire    |   |   |
|          | damage equal to the escalation die value times   |   |   |
|          | ten (0-10-20-30-40-50-60) if they have not taken |   |   |
|          | fire damage since the end of their last turn.    |   |   |
|          | Enemies who resist fire damage take half damage  |   |   |
|          | from this fire giant's fire aura.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Greater fist of Unyr:* Once per battle, the     |   |   |
|          | fire giant priest-general can use *Unyr's divine |   |   |
|          | fist* as a quick action.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Building flame:* Whenever the fire giant        |   |   |
|          | priest-general makes an attack that staggers a   |   |   |
|          | target or reduces a target to 0 hp or fewer,     |   |   |
|          | enemies lose their fire resistances until the    |   |   |
|          | escalation die next advances.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Incandescent holy blaze:* Fire attacks that     |   |   |
|          | miss the fire giant do not damage it and have no |   |   |
|          | effect, and the fire giant instead heals hp      |   |   |
|          | equal to five times the attacker's level.        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Flux Elemental

#### Flux Elemental

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | [Roll 1d4 when the flux elemental rolls           | A |   |
| level     | initiative and when it shifts to determine its    | C | 1 |
|           | new form, a benefit, and its current              | * | 9 |
| Troop     | attack]{.underline}                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | **1** *Shift to air:* When the flux elemental     | * | 6 |
|           | shifts to air, it gains *flight* until it shifts  | * |   |
|           | to a different form (it can land as part of its   | P | 7 |
|           | next move after shifting out of air), and it also | D | 0 |
|           | gains a +1 attack bonus (cumulative) until the    | * |   |
|           | end of the battle!                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Wind touch +10 vs. PD**---14 damage             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 4 damage.                                 | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | **2** *Shift to earth:* When the flux elemental   | * |   |
|           | shifts to earth, it gains a +1 AC bonus           | * |   |
|           | (cumulative) until the end of the battle!         |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Rocky fist +10 vs. AC**---18 damage             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | **3** *Shift to fire:* When the flux elemental    | P |   |
|           | shifts to fire, it gains a +1d6 damage bonus with | * |   |
|           | all its attacks (cumulative, only applies to      | * |   |
|           | hits).                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Scorching hands +10 vs. PD**---10 fire damage,  |   |   |
|           | and 5 ongoing fire damage                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 fire damage.                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **4** *Shift to water:* When the flux elemental   |   |   |
|           | shifts to water, it gains 2d6 additional hit      |   |   |
|           | points (cumulative) until the end of the battle!  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Whoosh and a slam +10 vs. PD**---10 damage      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* If the target is staggered,   |   |   |
|           | it is dazed until the end of its next turn.       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Shift:* Unless the escalation die is 6+, roll a  |   |   |
|           | d6 at the start of the flux elemental's turn. On  |   |   |
|           | a 4+, the flux elemental shifts.                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Power-up:* The bonuses from shifts are           |   |   |
|           | cumulative, but each category of bonus maxes out  |   |   |
|           | at 4 bonuses.                                     |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Flux Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | [Roll 1d4 when the flux elemental rolls          | A |   |
| level    | initiative and when it shifts to determine its   | C | 2 |
|          | new form, a benefit, and its current             | * | 1 |
| Troop    | attack]{.underline}                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | **1** *Shift to air:* When the big flux          | * | 8 |
| lemental | elemental shifts to air, it gains *flight* until | * |   |
|          | it shifts to a different form, and it also gains | P | 1 |
|          | a +1 attack bonus (cumulative) until the end of  | D | 0 |
|          | the battle!                                      | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Wind touch +12 vs. PD**---20 damage            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 7 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **2** *Shift to earth:* When the big flux        | D |   |
|          | elemental shifts to earth, it gains a +1 AC      | * |   |
|          | bonus (cumulative) until the end of the battle!  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Rocky fist +12 vs. AC**---26 damage            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **3** *Shift to fire:* When the big flux         | H |   |
|          | elemental shifts to fire, it gains a +1d8 damage | P |   |
|          | bonus when it hits with an attack (cumulative)   | * |   |
|          | until the end of the battle!                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Scorching hands +12 vs. PD**---15 fire damage, |   |   |
|          | and 10 ongoing fire damage                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 8 fire damage.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4** *Shift to water:* When the big flux        |   |   |
|          | elemental shifts to water, it gains 2d10         |   |   |
|          | additional hit points (cumulative) until the end |   |   |
|          | of the battle!                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Whoosh and a slam +12 vs. PD**---15 damage     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* If the target is staggered,  |   |   |
|          | it is dazed until the end of its next turn.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shift:* Unless the escalation die is 6+, roll a |   |   |
|          | d6 at the start of the flux elemental's turn. On |   |   |
|          | a 4+, the flux elemental shifts.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power-up:* The bonuses from shifts are          |   |   |
|          | cumulative, but each category of bonus maxes out |   |   |
|          | at 4 bonuses.                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Greater Flux Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 9th    | [Roll 1d4 when the flux elemental rolls          | A |   |
| level    | initiative and when it shifts to determine its   | C | 2 |
|          | new form, a benefit, and its current             | * | 3 |
| Troop    | attack]{.underline}                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| E        | **1** *Shift to air:* When the greater flux      | * | 0 |
| lemental | elemental shifts to air, it gains *flight* until | * |   |
|          | it shifts to a different form, and it also gains | P | 1 |
|          | a +1 attack bonus (cumulative) until the end of  | D | 6 |
|          | the battle!                                      | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Wind touch +14 vs. PD**---35 damage            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **2** *Shift to earth:* When the greater flux    | D |   |
|          | elemental shifts to earth, it gains a +1 AC      | * |   |
|          | bonus (cumulative) until the end of the battle!  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Rocky fist +14 vs. AC**---44 damage            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **3** *Shift to fire:* When the greater flux     | H |   |
|          | elemental shifts to fire, it gains a +1d12       | P |   |
|          | damage bonus when it hits with an attack         | * |   |
|          | (cumulative) until the end of the battle!        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Scorching hands +14 vs. PD**---25 fire damage, |   |   |
|          | and 15 ongoing fire damage                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 fire damage.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4** *Shift to water:* When the greater flux    |   |   |
|          | elemental shifts to water, it gains 6d6          |   |   |
|          | additional hit points (cumulative) until the end |   |   |
|          | of the battle!                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Whoosh and a slam +14 vs. PD**---30 damage     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* If the target is staggered,  |   |   |
|          | it is dazed until the end of its next turn.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shift:* Unless the escalation die is 6+, roll a |   |   |
|          | d6 at the start of the flux elemental's turn. On |   |   |
|          | a 4+, the flux elemental shifts.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power-up:* The bonuses from shifts are          |   |   |
|          | cumulative, but each category of bonus maxes out |   |   |
|          | at 4 bonuses.                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Flux Elemental

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 11th   | [Roll 1d4 when the flux elemental rolls          | A |   |
| level    | initiative and when it shifts to determine its   | C | 2 |
|          | new form, a benefit, and its current             | * | 5 |
| Troop    | attack]{.underline}                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| E        | **1** *Shift to air:* When the epic flux         | * | 2 |
| lemental | elemental shifts to air, it gains *flight* until | * |   |
|          | it shifts to a different form, and it also gains | P | 2 |
|          | a +1 attack bonus (cumulative) until the end of  | D | 6 |
|          | the battle!                                      | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Wind touch +14 vs. PD**---55 damage            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **2** *Shift to earth:* When the epic flux       | D |   |
|          | elemental shifts to earth, it gains a +1 AC      | * |   |
|          | bonus (cumulative) until the end of the battle!  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Rocky fist +14 vs. AC**---64 damage            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **3** *Shift to fire:* When the epic flux        | H |   |
|          | elemental shifts to fire, it gains a +1d12       | P |   |
|          | damage bonus when it hits with an attack         | * |   |
|          | (cumulative) until the end of the battle!        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Scorching hands +14 vs. PD**---35 fire damage, |   |   |
|          | and 20 ongoing fire damage                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 fire damage.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4** *Shift to water:* When the epic flux       |   |   |
|          | elemental shifts to water, it gains 6d10         |   |   |
|          | additional hit points (cumulative) until the end |   |   |
|          | of the battle!                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Whoosh and a slam +14 vs. PD**---40 damage     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* If the target is staggered,  |   |   |
|          | it is dazed until the end of its next turn.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shift:* Unless the escalation die is 6+, roll a |   |   |
|          | d6 at the start of the flux elemental's turn. On |   |   |
|          | a 4+, the flux elemental shifts.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power-up:* The bonuses from shifts are          |   |   |
|          | cumulative, but each category of bonus maxes out |   |   |
|          | at 4 bonuses.                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### The Fomori

[Unclean-One Abilities]{.underline}

Add one or two of the following abilities to humanoids to create
cultists who worship the true-fomori (or to beasts to create corrupted
animals).

1.  *Ugly physique:* The cultist is repulsive almost beyond
    comprehension, but its twisted form grants it the ability to
    withstand blows. It gains +2 to AC and +1 to PD.

2.  *Uncanny speed:* The unclean-one gains a +1d10 bonus to its
    initiative. It has a +2 attack bonus against enemies that started
    the battle with lower initiative scores.

3.  *Unearthly beauty:* The cultist has a perfect and unaging physical
    body, a counterpoint to its increasingly corrupted soul. It gains +2
    to PD and MD.

4.  *Unhealthy vigor:* When a melee attack hits the unclean-one, sores
    and pustules on its body burst, and the attacker takes 5 acid damage
    (champion: 10 damage; epic 15 damage).

5.  *Unhinged joints:* The unclean-one cultist can move in strange ways,
    crawling up walls like a giant bug, skittering along the ground, and
    so forth. It gains a +2 bonus to disengage checks.

6.  *Unholy regeneration:* When the escalation die is odd, the
    unclean-one heals hit points equal to its level times the escalation
    die value at the start of its turn.

7.  *Unnatural strength:* Once per battle, when the unclean-one misses
    with an attack (but not when it fumbles), it can change it to a hit
    and increase the damage by 2 for every point in the difference
    between the missed result and what it needed to hit as a free
    action. When it does, it takes 1d6 damage for every 2 extra damage
    it deals this way. (It must deal the extra damage if it changes a
    miss into a hit.)

8.  *Unreal scent:* Humanoid enemies that move into engagement with the
    unclean-one must immediately roll a save or take 5 poison damage
    (champion: 10 damage, epic 15: damage). Non-humanoid enemies
    (including druids in beast form, those who have taken undead form
    with the aid of necromantic spells, construct races, ooze races,
    etc.) might be more susceptible (hard save, 16+), or less
    susceptible (easy save, 6+), GM's call.

All unclean-ones get the following ability

*Unreasonable master:* The true-fomori can reach into the unclean-one's
mind to give them visions and look through their memories. In this way
the fomori keeps an eye on its far-flung cults, and gives guidance to
its heralds, even speaking directly through them if it desires. Oh, and
those visions can be instructive religious apparitions, pleasing dreams
sent as rewards, or terrifying and painful hallucinations sent as
punishment (or because the fomori felt like inflicting suffering).

[Fomorian Mutation Nastier Specials]{.underline}

Roll on the table below if you wish. You can also give fomorians some
unclean-one abilities (though never unearthly beauty).

1.  *Extra arm:* When the escalation die is odd, the fomorian can make
    one extra melee attack per round as a quick action.

2.  *Extra eyes:* The fomorian has a cluster of small eyes in the back
    of its head, a huge eye on a shoulder, a slug-like eye stalk, etc.
    The fomorian can't be surprised or ambushed, and it has *true sight*
    (spells like *blur*, *invisibility*, etc. don't work on it).

3.  *Fair is foul:* Once per turn as a free action, the fomorian can
    make the following attack:

> **C: Evil eye +11 vs. PD (one nearby or faraway enemy, but not one
> that has been targeted by this attack since the start of the last
> round)**---10 ongoing damage, and the target's skin and bones
> painfully twist to make them hideous to behold. At the start of each
> day, provided they receive some form of magical healing, the twisted
> victim rolls a save with a bonus equal to their Charisma or
> Constitution modifier (whichever is lower) to recover their original
> appearance.
>
> *Limited use:* Once one target has been hit by this attack, no further
> *evil eye* attacks can be made by any fomorian this battle.

4.  *Thick skin:* +1 AC and +2 PD.

#### Fomorian Brute

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Crude club +10 vs. AC**---18 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Dog pile:* If there are at least three other     | * | 9 |
| Mook      | fomorians engaged with the target, the fomorian   | * |   |
|           | brute can make the following attack:              |   | 1 |
| Giant     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | **Bite +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---12 damage       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Double-strength mook:* The fomorian brute mook   | D | 6 |
|           | counts as two 5th level mooks when you are      | * |   |
|           | building battles.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fomorian Bully

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 6th    | **Big club +11 vs. AC**---40 damage              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Resist mental attacks 16+:* When an attack      | * | 1 |
| Troop    | against MD targets this creature, the attacker   | * |   |
|          | must roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it |   | 1 |
| Giant    | only deals half damage.                          | * | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Too stupid to notice:* When the fomorian is     | P | 1 |
|          | moving, it only takes half damage from           | D | 8 |
|          | attacks---it isn't really tougher, it just       | * | 0 |
|          | doesn't notice some wounds.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fomorian Top-Cannibal

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 7th    | **Big spiked club +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---30  | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | *Both attacks are natural even rolls, hit or     | * |   |
|          | miss:* The fomorian can make a third attack as a |   | 1 |
| Giant    | free action.                                     | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Eat the dead:* Twice per battle, if the         | P | 2 |
|          | fomorian is next to a dead body, as a move       | D | 2 |
|          | action it can eat part of the corpse, healing    | * | 0 |
|          | 1d6 × 10 hp.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Strength from the dead:* When the fomorian      | M |   |
|          | top-cannibal heals from eating a corpse, it      | D |   |
|          | gains a bonus to damage with its next attack,    | * |   |
|          | hit or miss, equal to the hit points it healed.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

[True-Fomori Houses Nastier Specials]{.underline}

Each of the greater fomori had many offspring, the true-fomori. While
true-fomori are each unique you can usually tell which calde a
true-fomori originated in.

Use the following nastier special groups when you want to summon on the
offspring of a specific greater fomori. You can also add in some
fomorian mutations and unclean-one abilities if you like.

[House of Songs]{.underline}

These fomori sing songs that drive listeners to insanity.

*Song of the House:* When the escalation die is odd, the enemy with the
highest MD must roll a save at the start of the round. If it fails, it's
confused until the end of its next turn. When the escalation die is
even, the same effect applies to the enemy with the lowest MD. The
fomori chooses if enemies are tied for highest or lowest MD.

*Ear-bleed:* The ears of all non-fomori creatures in the battle begin to
bleed, and continue to do so until the end of the day. Until the next
full heal-up, those creatures take a --4 penalty to skill checks
involving social situations or detecting sounds.

*Discordancy:* The first time each battle the true fomori is staggered,
each of its enemies in the battle is hampered until the end of its next
turn.

[House of Eyes]{.underline}

These fomori usually have lots of eyes, or a single prominent eye, and
fly by hovering.

*Hovering flight:* This creature flies, its host's unwashed and diseased
feet hovering inches above the ground.

*Eye beam:* Once per turn as a quick action, the fomori can fire a
powerful ray from one or more of its eyes.

**R: Eye beam +5 +fomori's level vs. PD**---7 ongoing force damage
(champion: 14 damage; epic: 21 damage)

*Natural 16+:* The target pops free from enemies it's engaged with and
can't engage any enemies until it saves against the ongoing force
damage.

*Eye theft:* When a creature is staggered, it begins to feel as if its
eyes are being pulled out by an invisible force. It takes a --1 penalty
to hit and damage. Enemies that die in the presence of this fomori do
indeed have their eyes sucked out as the fomori absorbs the eyeballs.

[House of Nightmares]{.underline}

These fomori shift their forms instinctually, constantly devolving into
ever-more horrible creatures.

*Shifting from Nightmares:* When the true-fomori is hit by an attack
that targets PD or MD, until the start of its next turn, the values of
its PD and MD switch and it gains a bonus to AC equal to the escalation
die.

*Nightmares:* After a battle with the fomori, the character with the
lowest MD (randomly choose on a tie) has a nightmare during the
following night, with a 50% chance that the nightmare somehow comes true
the next day.

*Skin theft:* You know that trick with the tablecloth? When the
true-fomori scores a critical hit, it does that to some of its target's
skin, and the target is stunned (save ends). Replacing the skin might
take more than normal healing, too, and it might take a while to look
right on a creature again.

[House of Spiders]{.underline}

These true-fomori tend to have lots of legs and can control spiders,
scorpions, ticks, and other arachnids.

*Scuttle:* The true-fomori can climb like a spider and squeeze its body
down to scuttle swiftly under low openings.

*Bite:* Once per turn as a quick action, the true-fomori can make the
following attack to inject acid into its victim and drink its innards.

**Draining bite +5 + fomori's level vs. AC**---7 acid damage (champion:
14 damage; epic: 21 damage)

*Natural 16+:* The target heals using a recovery, but the true-fomori
gains the hit points.

*Sun-eating:* A creature staggered by this fomori can no longer see the
sun the following day and must rely on lantern light or magical
illumination. There is a 50% chance each day thereafter that the
adventurer recovers and can once again see sunlight and feels its
warmth. While a creature is unable to see or feel the healing sun,
whenever it rolls recovery dice, it must reroll any die that has the
maximum result (for example, a 10 on a d10).

[House of Colors]{.underline}

These true-fomori have plumage or fur in unnatural madness-causing
colors.

*Color out of time:* An enemy making a ranged attack against the
true-fomori takes a penalty to the attack equal to the escalation die
and can't use the escalation die for that attack.

*Color drain:* When the true-fomori drops a creature to 0 hp or lower,
that creature is drained of all color and can no longer perceive color.
While under this effect, the creature takes a --4 penalty to social
skill checks and a --1 penalty to saves. Restoring color to the creature
requires a quest involving walking a sacred labyrinth.

#### Fomori Tyrant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Crushing embrace + 15 vs. AC**---40 damage,    | * | 4 |
| Spoiler  | and the target is stuck (save ends) if the       | * |   |
|          | tyrant isn't already embracing an enemy          |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 0 |
| erration | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Skin-twisting breath  | * |   |
|          | +15 vs. PD**---65 poison damage                  | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *Limited use:* Only against a target that is     | * | 0 |
|          | stuck from its *crushing embrace* attack.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: "I command you to eat your own flesh" +15   | * |   |
|          | vs. MD (1d3 nearby or far-away enemies)**---15   | * |   |
|          | psychic damage, and 10 ongoing psychic damage    | M |   |
|          | and the target is hampered (save ends both)      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* The target is helpless instead of        | * |   |
|          | hampered.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Chaos aura:* At the start of each round roll a  | * |   |
|          | d6 and compare it to the escalation die.         | H |   |
|          | Whichever result is highest determines the       | P |   |
|          | true-fomori's effect on local reality for that   | * |   |
|          | round. (If there are multiple true-fomori in the | * |   |
|          | battle, only roll for one per round.)            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1: Bleeding steel**---Inanimate objects scream |   |   |
|          | and bleed.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2--3: Creeping insanity**---Each non-fomori    |   |   |
|          | creature takes a --2 penalty to MD.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4--5: Abandoned and friendless**---The         |   |   |
|          | adventurers can't aid each other, communicate    |   |   |
|          | with each other, or otherwise count each other   |   |   |
|          | as allies.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6: Doom**---The fomori and its allies use the  |   |   |
|          | escalation die and the adventurers do not.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with the            |   |   |
|          | true-fomori who have 72 hp or fewer are dazed    |   |   |
|          | (--4 to attack) and cannot use the escalation    |   |   |
|          | die.                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power from worship:* At the start of its turn,  |   |   |
|          | the fomori tyrant heals 5 hp for each fomorian   |   |   |
|          | that can see or hear it, and also heals 5 hp if  |   |   |
|          | at least one unclean-one can see or hear it.     |   |   |
|          | This effect affects the fomori even if it's      |   |   |
|          | dead, healing it from 0 hp.                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fomori Torturer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Irradiant touch +17 vs. AC**---40 damage, 30   | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | ongoing poison damage, and the target's teeth    | * |   |
|          | and hair start to fall out                       |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 2 |
| erration | *Crit:* The target is weakened (save ends).      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **C: "Kill your friends" +17 vs. MD (one nearby  | D | 6 |
|          | or faraway enemy)**---45 psychic damage, 35      | * | 0 |
|          | ongoing psychic damage and the target is         | * |   |
|          | confused (save ends both)                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 45 psychic damage.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Chaos aura:* At the start of each round roll a  | D |   |
|          | d6 and compare it to the escalation die.         | * |   |
|          | Whichever result is highest determines the       | * |   |
|          | true-fomori's effect on local reality for that   |   |   |
|          | round. (If there are multiple true-fomori in the | * |   |
|          | battle, only roll for one per round.)            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | **1: Crawling shadows**---Wherever the fomori's  | P |   |
|          | shadow falls, small objects turn into insects.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **2--3: Deeper insanity**---When an enemy        |   |   |
|          | target's the fomori's MD and gets a natural odd  |   |   |
|          | attack roll, the attack rebounds and that enemy  |   |   |
|          | must reroll the attack against itself.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4--5: Sudden reversals**---This round the      |   |   |
|          | escalation die value is a negative, subtracting  |   |   |
|          | from the adventurers' attack rolls.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6: Doom**---The fomori and its allies use the  |   |   |
|          | escalation die and the adventurers do not.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* Enemies engaged with the            |   |   |
|          | true-fomori who have 120 hp or fewer are dazed   |   |   |
|          | (--4 to attack) and cannot use the escalation    |   |   |
|          | die.                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Power from worship:* At the start of its turn,  |   |   |
|          | the fomori torturer heals 5 hp for each fomorian |   |   |
|          | that can see or hear it, and also heals 5 hp if  |   |   |
|          | at least one unclean-one can see or hear it.     |   |   |
|          | This effect affects the fomori even if it's      |   |   |
|          | dead, healing it from 0 hp.                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Frogfolk

[Special Abilities for All Frogspawn]{.underline}

You should certainly use one ability per frogspawn, occasionally two.
For frogspawn mooks, treat the abilities as usable once per battle.

*Disgusting tongue:* The frogspawn deals poison damage equal to its
level to any character that pops free of it or successfully disengages
from it. (Teleporting away is probably tongue-free unless the GM is
hopping mad.)

*Dunk and cover:* If the battle is taking place in a swamp, lake, or
river, whenever the frogspawn misses with a natural even attack roll, it
can duck out of sight. Remove the frogspawn from the table until the
start of its next turn. At the start of its next turn, place it anywhere
nearby its previous location, but not engaged with an enemy.

*Erratic leap (move action):* If the frogspawn is unengaged at the start
of its turn, choose a random nearby enemy the frogspawn can see. The
frogspawn leaps into engagement with that enemy and its crit range with
melee attacks expands by 3 until the end of the turn.

*Paranoid destroyer:* This frogspawn can't be surprised. If there's a
surprise round, it gets to act. If there isn't a surprise round at the
start of combat, the frogspawn gets a surprise round if its natural
initiative roll is 16+. On the down side, subtract 2 from this
frogspawn's MD, because it's always sure it's going to die. (Gamemaster:
Don't give this ability to all the frogspawn in a battle. Just one or
two.)

#### Frogspawn Grunt

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 2nd    | **Frogspear +6 vs. AC**---6 damage               | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * | 5 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Poisoned spears:* When using a *frogspear*, a   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | natural attack roll of 16+ inflicts 3 ongoing    | * | 1 |
|          | poison damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 7 |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Monk

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 3rd    | **Flailing frog fists +8 vs. AC**---8 damage, or | A |   |
| level    | 12 damage if this is the first time the          | C | 1 |
|          | frogspawn monk has attacked the target this      | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | battle                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Poison burst:* When a frogspawn monk is slain,  | * | 4 |
|          | it may make a *poison burst* attack as an        | * |   |
|          | interrupt action.                                | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Poison Burst +8 vs.   | * |   |
|          | PD (all enemies engaged with the monk)**---5     | * |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Spellcroaker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Frogspear +9 vs. AC**---13 damage              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **R: Curseblast +9 vs. MD (one nearby or faraway | * | 9 |
| Leader   | enemy)**---13 damage, and if a target is         | * |   |
|          | staggered by this attack, the spellcroaker may   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | make another *curseblast* attack immediately     | * | 7 |
|          | against a different target                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          | **C: Eruption of Frogs +9 vs. PD (all engaged    | D | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---15 ongoing poison damage, and the   | * |   |
|          | target pops free of the spellcroaker             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Croaking chorus:* At the start of each round,   | M |   |
|          | all spellcroakers in a battle start to croak     | D |   |
|          | together in chorus. This imposes a special bonus | * |   |
|          | or penalty depending on the croak generated by   | * |   |
|          | the chorus that round (roll 1d6).                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *1-2: Croak of Dismay:* If the number of         | * |   |
|          | spellcroakers is equal to or greater than the    | H |   |
|          | value of the escalation die, then the player     | P |   |
|          | characters do not get the benefit of the         | * |   |
|          | escalation die, but all frogs and frogfolk may   | * |   |
|          | add the value of the escalation die to their     |   |   |
|          | attack rolls instead.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *3--4: Croak of Victory:* All attacks by         |   |   |
|          | frogfolk gain a bonus to damage equal to the     |   |   |
|          | number of croakers.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *5-6: Croak of Choking:* Over the course of the  |   |   |
|          | round, you may force the player characters to    |   |   |
|          | reroll a number of d20 rolls (attack rolls,      |   |   |
|          | saving throws, skill checks, death saves) equal  |   |   |
|          | to the number of croakers.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | When a spellcroaker drops to 0 hit points, roll  |   |   |
|          | a d20---on a 11+, the remaining spellcroakers    |   |   |
|          | maintain the *croaking chorus* for the rest of   |   |   |
|          | the round. Otherwise, the chorus effect is       |   |   |
|          | cancelled for the rest of that round.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Croakmaster:* This spellcroaker counts as two   |   |   |
|          | spellcroakers for the purposes of the *croaking  |   |   |
|          | chorus*.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Frog Curse:* If a spellcroaker rolls a natural  |   |   |
|          | 18+ when using a curse, the target is            |   |   |
|          | transformed into a steadily shrinking frog-like  |   |   |
|          | humanoid and is hampered and weakened (save ends |   |   |
|          | all effects). If the curse somehow ran its full  |   |   |
|          | course, the target would no doubt shrink down    |   |   |
|          | into a frog, but PCs are made of strong stuff    |   |   |
|          | and should be able to evade a fate that might    |   |   |
|          | affect common folk.                              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frog Knight

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 5th    | **Knobbly club +10 vs. AC**---18 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Lance +10 vs. AC**---25 damage, and 5 ongoing  | * | 0 |
| Blocker  | damage (save ends)                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Limited use:* 1/battle                          | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Leap to the defense:* Once per round, if a frog | P | 1 |
|          | knight is unengaged, and an ally is targeted by  | D | 0 |
|          | an attack against AC anywhere on the             | * | 0 |
|          | battlefield, the frog knight may immediately     | * |   |
|          | leap to its ally's side and give that ally a +2  |   |   |
|          | bonus to AC for the rest of the round as an      | * |   |
|          | interrupt action.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Heavy armor:* Once per battle, when struck by   | * |   |
|          | an attack that targets AC, take half damage from |   |   |
|          | that attack instead.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Poisoned spikes: On a natural 16+, a hit from a  | H |   |
|          | frog knight's club inflicts 5 ongoing poison     | P |   |
|          | damage (save ends).                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Deceiver

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Hidden knife +8 vs. AC (or +12 vs AC if the    | A |   |
| level    | frogfolk has a higher initiative)**---20 damage  | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | **R: Poison darts +10 vs. AC**---18 poison       | * |   |
|          | damage                                           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Poison touch:* This monster can coat items with | * |   |
|          | poison. Once per battle on a hit their attack    | P | 7 |
|          | does an extra ongoing 10 poison damage (hard     | D | 2 |
|          | save ends). Outside battle they can coat objects | * |   |
|          | with a skin-contact poison---10 poison damage    | * |   |
|          | and 10 ongoing poison damage (save ends, or hard |   |   |
|          | save if the target ingests the poison).          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Disguise:* Frogspawn deceivers are experts at   | M |   |
|          | disguising themselves as other less froggy       | D |   |
|          | races, it requires a DC 25 skill check to see    | * |   |
|          | the truth beneath their veils or deep cloaks and | * |   |
|          | lifelike masks. Once they attack what they are   |   |   |
|          | becomes obvious.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Jump:* These froggy assassins can jump huge     | H |   |
|          | distances. When the escalation die is even       | P |   |
|          | frogspawn deceivers can jump as a quick action,  | * |   |
|          | leaping over enemies and past obstacles in a way | * |   |
|          | that can't be intercepted and that doesn't       |   |   |
|          | provoke attacks.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Slippery customer:* Frogspawn deceivers do not  |   |   |
|          | take miss damage.                                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Mutant Bullfrog

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 5th    | **Gore +10 vs. AC**---20 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The bullfrog may also make a | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *bite* attack as a free action                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | **C: Tongue grab +10 vs. PD (one nearby          | * | 4 |
|          | target)**---15 damage, and the target pops free  | * |   |
|          | of whoever it is engaged with now and moves to   | P | 2 |
|          | be engaged with the bullfrog                     | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The bullfrog may also make a | * |   |
|          | *bite* attack as a free action.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +10 vs. AC**---20   | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* If smaller than the mutant        | * |   |
|          | bullfrog, the target is partially-swallowed, and | * |   |
|          | takes 10 ongoing damage (disengaging or popping  |   |   |
|          | free ends).                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Roar of pain:* The bullfrog bellows as a free   | H |   |
|          | action when first staggered or when the          | P |   |
|          | escalation die becomes even...                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Bellow +10 vs. PD     |   |   |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---20 thunder damage       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Frenzy:* The bullfrog may add the escalation    |   |   |
|          | die to its attack rolls when staggered.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Champion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Feathered frogspear +11 vs. AC**---22 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **C: Whirling chains +11 vs. AC (one nearby      | * | 0 |
| Troop    | enemy, or one faraway enemy at +5 vs AC)**---18  | * |   |
|          | damage and the target is stuck (save ends, as    |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | does the frogspawn making a *whirling chains*    | * | 6 |
|          | attack again)                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 9 |
|          | *Great leap:* The frogspawn champion can use its | D | 0 |
|          | whole turn to leap high into the sky, taking it  | * |   |
|          | out of combat (or at least making it really hard | * |   |
|          | to hit, your call). The following turn the       |   |   |
|          | great-one lands on top of or next to an enemy    | * |   |
|          | and makes the following attack:                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **Death from above +14 vs. AC**---30 damage      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Long sticky tongue:* Nearby enemies who roll a  | * |   |
|          | natural 1 save or attack roll get an item of     | * |   |
|          | theirs stolen by the frogspawn                   | H |   |
|          | champion---probably their weapon.                | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Longer stickier tongue:* Enemies now get their  |   |   |
|          | items taken away on a natural 1, 2, or 3.        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Thug

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Barbed spear +12 vs. AC**---20 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* 5 ongoing poison damage.          | * | 9 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Double-strength mook:* This monster counts as   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | two mooks when building battles.                 | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frogspawn Old-One

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Elite    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Pulsing batrachite scepter +12 vs. PD (each    | A |   |
| level    | engaged enemy)**---30 force damage               | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Leader   | **C: Mental whip +12 vs. MD (one or two nearby   | * |   |
|          | creatures)**---30 psychic damage                 |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Hit against a frogspawn ally:* If it wasn't     | * |   |
|          | killed by the attack, the ally heals 60 hit      | P | 1 |
|          | points and immediately moves as a free action.   | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss against an enemy:* 15 ongoing psychic      | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Mindblast +12 vs. MD (one or two nearby or  | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---35 psychic       | M |   |
|          | damage                                           | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit when the escalation die is      | * |   |
|          | odd:* The target's next move action is           |   |   |
|          | controlled by the old one.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit when the escalation die is     | H |   |
|          | even:* The next time the target attacks, if it   | P |   |
|          | includes the old one in the attack the old one   | * |   |
|          | may make a free *mindblast* attack against the   | * |   |
|          | target.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Levitating throne:* The old-one is much too     |   |   |
|          | ponderous to move on its own, but can levitate   |   |   |
|          | its throne slowly about. Allies of the old-one   |   |   |
|          | that are next to it can cling to the throne for  |   |   |
|          | a free ride. Engaged enemies that could make an  |   |   |
|          | opportunity attack against the frogspawn old one |   |   |
|          | when it moves can instead roll a save (11+) to   |   |   |
|          | cling on as well.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Hallucinogenic sweat:* Enemies who miss with a  |   |   |
|          | melee attack must save (11+) or become confused  |   |   |
|          | until the end of their next turn. The save is    |   |   |
|          | easy (6+) for characters who missed with a       |   |   |
|          | longish weapon like a staff or spear, hard (16+) |   |   |
|          | for those who missed with an unarmed attack.     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Fungaloid

Some fungaloids can make special attacks. For those, add the fungaloid
creature's level to attacks and damage, as indicated.

**C: Poison tentacles 5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)---**3 +
level poison damage, and the target is vulnerable to *fungal attacks*
(save ends)

**C: Brown noise 5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)---**3 + level
ongoing thunder damage

**C: Hallucinogenia 3 + level vs. MD (one nearby enemy)---**The target
is confused (easy save ends, 6+)

**C: Infectious spores 5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)---**3 +
level ongoing poison damage

**C: Piercing shriek 5 + level vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies)---**4 + level
psychic damage

#### Fomorian Brute

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Crude club +10 vs. AC**---18 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Dog pile:* If there are at least three other     | * | 9 |
| Mook      | fomorians engaged with the target, the fomorian   | * |   |
|           | brute can make the following attack:              |   | 1 |
| Giant     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | **Bite +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---12 damage       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Double-strength mook:* The fomorian brute mook   | D | 6 |
|           | counts as two 5th level mooks when you are      | * |   |
|           | building battles.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fomorian Bully

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 6th    | **Big club +11 vs. AC**---40 damage              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Resist mental attacks 16+:* When an attack      | * | 1 |
| Troop    | against MD targets this creature, the attacker   | * |   |
|          | must roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it |   | 1 |
| Giant    | only deals half damage.                          | * | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Too stupid to notice:* When the fomorian is     | P | 1 |
|          | moving, it only takes half damage from           | D | 8 |
|          | attacks---it isn't really tougher, it just       | * | 0 |
|          | doesn't notice some wounds.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fungaloid Creeper

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Probing tendrils +6 vs. AC (1d3 attacks)**---2  | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Troop     | *Natural 18+:* The target is stuck until the end  | * |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 |   | 1 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Natural 1--5:* Both the fungaloid and its target | * |   |
|           | take 1d4 damage.                                  | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Food is here:* When a fungaloid creeper scores a | * |   |
|           | critical hit with an attack, all nearby           | * |   |
|           | fungaloids move to engage the fungaloid's target, |   |   |
|           | even if that target has dropped to 0 hp. The move | * |   |
|           | is a free action, and engaged creepers can roll   | * |   |
|           | disengage attempts instead of taking opportunity  | M |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Slow, rolling wave:* Whenever the escalation die | * |   |
|           | is even, each creeper must succeed on a normal    |   |   |
|           | save at the start of its turn or lose its move    | * |   |
|           | action that turn.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Fungal attack**---Make ONE fungal attack        | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Aerial Spore

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +1                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 2nd     | **C: Stinging tendrils +6 vs. PD (one nearby      | A |   |
| level     | enemy)**---4 poison damage, and the target is     | C | 9 |
|           | weakened until the end of its next turn           | * |   |
| Mook      |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           | *Puffball exploder:* The first time each round an |   | 3 |
| Plant     | aerial spore in the battle drops to 0 hp, it      | * |   |
|           | explodes and 1d3 nearby non-fungus non-construct  | * | 7 |
|           | creatures are covered in spores and begin to      | P |   |
|           | choke. Until the end of the battle, when a        | D |   |
|           | choking creature rolls a natural 1--5 on an       | * |   |
|           | attack roll, it takes damage equal to the natural | * |   |
|           | roll. If a creature is affected twice by this     |   |   |
|           | attack, the damage it takes on a natural 1--5     | * |   |
|           | doubles; if affected three times, it triples,     | * |   |
|           | etc.                                              | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Spores:* A creature choking from *puffball       | * |   |
|           | exploder* can use a standard action to wash the   | * |   |
|           | spores off itself and/or cough them up,           |   |   |
|           | preventing further choking effects until it's     | * |   |
|           | affected by *puffball exploder* again.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Weightless:* The aerial spore floats upon air    | P |   |
|           | currents, but it prefers to stay within 5 to 7    | * |   |
|           | feet of the ground so it can use its tendrils to  | * |   |
|           | keep it in place or propel it. A free-floating    |   |   |
|           | spore too faraway from the ground to use its      |   |   |
|           | tendrils can easily be blown about from strong    |   |   |
|           | winds or similar magical effects.                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sporrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Chitinous bite +7 vs. AC**---5 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The sporrior can make | * | 6 |
| Wrecker   | a *spore cloud* attack this turn as a quick       | * |   |
|           | action.                                           |   | 1 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | **R: Parasitic darts +6 vs. AC (1d3 nearby or     | * |   |
|           | faraway enemies in a group)**---5 poison damage   | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The sporrior can make | * |   |
|           | a *spore cloud* attack this turn as a quick       | * |   |
|           | action.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Spore cloud +6 vs. PD (1d3 nearby            | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---4 poison damage                      | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Sprinter:* A sporrior gains an extra move action | * |   |
|           | when the escalation die is odd.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A sporrior can climb on ceilings  | * |   |
|           | and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fungaloid Drudge

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Pitchfork +8 vs. AC**---10 damage               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The drudge can make a *fungal      | * | 7 |
| Troop     | attack* this turn as a quick action.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Plant     | **Fungal attack**---Make ONE fungal attack        | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Braincap

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Programmed brain:** During its turn when one or | A |   |
| level     | more nearby enemies are staggered, the braincap   | C | 1 |
|           | uses *focused brain blast*. When no enemies are   | * | 3 |
| Wrecker   | staggered, the braincap uses *hallucinogenia* if  | * |   |
|           | its hit points are even, and *psionic filaments*  |   | 1 |
| Plant     | if its hit points are odd.                        | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Focused brain blast +8 vs. PD (1 nearby or   | P | 9 |
|           | faraway staggered enemy)**---21 force damage      | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 psychic damage.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Hallucinogenia +8 vs. MD (1d3 nearby         | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---The target is confused (easy save    | * |   |
|           | ends, 6+) and vulnerable to psychic damage until  | M |   |
|           | the end of the battle                             | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* The target sees odd colors at the corners | * |   |
|           | of its vision until it has taken a full heal-up   |   |   |
|           | (--2 penalty to skill checks to see things).      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Psionic filaments +8 vs. MD (1d3 nearby      | H |   |
|           | enemies)**---15 psychic damage                    | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Spore

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: Directly after the fungaloid empress  | * | 1 |
|           | in the initiative order                           | * | 8 |
| 4th     |                                                   | A |   |
| level     | **Slime spikes +9 vs. AC**---6 poison damage      | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fungaloid Empress

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | **Crushing limbs +9 vs. AC (1d3 enemies engaged  | A |   |
| level    | with the empress)**---18 damage                  | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | *Combat womb:* At the end of each of the         | * |   |
|          | empress' turns, if there are fewer than two      |   | 1 |
| Plant    | elder spores (see below) per enemy, add a number | * | 8 |
|          | of elder spores to the battle so that there are  | * |   |
|          | two spores per enemy. A spore can "sprout"       | P | 1 |
|          | already engaged with a nearby or faraway enemy   | D | 7 |
|          | or on its own, it's up to you.                   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Sporulating spiracles:* Fungus grows on         |   |   |
|          | everything in the area! Whenever a non-fungus    | * |   |
|          | creature attempts to move, it must make a DC 18  | * |   |
|          | Dexterity or Strength check to do so or it loses | M |   |
|          | its move action. If the creature uses a standard | D |   |
|          | action to clear away fungus, it can move         | * |   |
|          | normally that turn.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fungaloid Monarch

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Mycotic scepter +9 vs. AC**---24 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 12+:* One nearby fungaloid can make a    | * | 4 |
| Leader    | *fungal attack* as a free action.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Plant     | *Natural 16+:* Up to three nearby fungaloids can  | * | 8 |
|           | each make a *fungal attack* as a free action.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Natural 20:* Up to five nearby fungaloids can    | D | 8 |
|           | each make a *fungal attack* as a free action.     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group mind:* The monarch's attacks deal +1       |   |   |
|           | damage for each other allied creature with the    | * |   |
|           | plant type in the battle (max +10).               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Drudge-summons:* If there are not enough nearby  | D |   |
|           | fungaloids to use up all the *fungal attacks*     | * |   |
|           | granted by the *mycotic scepter*, skip the extra  | * |   |
|           | fungal attacks but add a full-strength fungaloid  |   |   |
|           | drudge to the battle next to the fungaloid        | * |   |
|           | monarch.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Gargoyle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 5th     | **Furious claws and fangs +9 vs. AC**---9 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 11+:* The gargoyle can make two more     | * | 1 |
| Troop     | melee attacks as a free action (but never more    | * |   |
|           | than three total attacks per standard action,     |   | 1 |
| Construct | even if you roll another 11+).                    | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.        | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Rocky hide:* The gargoyle has *resist damage     |   |   |
|           | 12+* against attacks targeting AC.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Statues, statues, everywhere:* Because they      | M |   |
|           | often look like statues, gargoyles are capable of | D |   |
|           | springing a surprise on inattentive PCs. When     | * |   |
|           | there's a chance of such an ambush, give the PCs  | * |   |
|           | a champion-tier skill check (usually DC 20) to    |   |   |
|           | notice the gargoyles and avoid being surprised.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Gelahedron

For special abilities, see Ooze Abilities.

#### Gelatinous Tetrahedron

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +3                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Shlup'n'schlorp +9 vs. PD**---22 acid damage,  | A |   |
| level    | and the tetrahedron engulfs the target           | C | 1 |
|          | (functions like a grab; see below) if it's       | * | 7 |
| Blocker  | smaller than the tetrahedron                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Ooze     | *Miss:* The tetrahedron can make a *spasms*      | * | 4 |
|          | attack as a free action.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Spasms +9 vs. AC (up  | D | 6 |
|          | to 2 attacks, each against a different nearby    | * | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---11 damage                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Engulf and dissolve:* Targets engulfed/grabbed  | * |   |
|          | by the tetrahedron take 22 acid damage at the    | * |   |
|          | start of the cube's turn but are not viable      | M |   |
|          | targets for additional attacks by the            | D |   |
|          | tetrahedron. Multiple targets can be held within | * |   |
|          | the tetrahedron simultaneously.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Any engulfed creature that is also staggered     | * |   |
|          | must begin making last gasp saves or become      | * |   |
|          | paralyzed as the tetrahedron's toxins overwhelm  | H |   |
|          | it.                                              | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Instinctive actions:* Gelatinous creatures have | * |   |
|          | no brains, sometimes they just *do things*. When |   |   |
|          | the escalation die is odd, instead of making an  |   |   |
|          | attack or moving, roll a d4 to see what the      |   |   |
|          | tetrahedron does. If an option is not viable     |   |   |
|          | (you roll a 1 but there is no engaged enemy),    |   |   |
|          | reroll until you get a valid option.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1. C: Fling +9 vs. PD (one engaged             |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---14 damage, and the target pops free   |   |   |
|          | from the ooze and must roll an easy save (6+);   |   |   |
|          | on a failure, it loses its next move action      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2. C: Fling +9 vs. PD (one nearby enemy not    |   |   |
|          | engaged with the ooze)**---28 damage, and the    |   |   |
|          | target is flung somewhere nearby and must roll   |   |   |
|          | an easy save (6+); on a failure, it loses its    |   |   |
|          | next move action                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **3. C: Fling +9 vs. PD (one faraway             |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---42 damage, and the target is flung    |   |   |
|          | somewhere faraway and must roll an easy save     |   |   |
|          | (6+); on a failure, it loses its next move       |   |   |
|          | action                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4.** As a standard action the ooze quickly     |   |   |
|          | moves around the battlefield, oozing over 1d3    |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies. Those enemies become engaged     |   |   |
|          | with the ooze and stuck (save ends).             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *First failed save:* The target is engulfed      |   |   |
|          | instead of stuck.                                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gelatinous Cubahedron (aka Cube)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Shlup'n'schlorp +10 vs. PD**---30 acid damage, | A |   |
| level    | and the cube engulfs the target (functions like  | C | 1 |
|          | a grab; see below) if it's smaller than the cube | * | 8 |
| Blocker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The cube can make a spasms attack as a   |   | 1 |
| Ooze     | free action.                                     | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Spasms +10 vs. AC (up | P | 2 |
|          | to 2 attacks, each against a different nearby    | D | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---15 damage                             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Engulf and dissolve:* Targets engulfed/grabbed  |   |   |
|          | by the cube take 30 acid damage at the start of  | * |   |
|          | the cube's turn but are not viable targets for   | * |   |
|          | additional attacks by the cube. Multiple targets | M |   |
|          | can be held within the cube simultaneously.      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Any engulfed creature that is also staggered     | * |   |
|          | must begin making last gasp saves or become      |   |   |
|          | paralyzed as the cube's toxins overwhelm it.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Instinctive actions:* Gelatinous creatures have | H |   |
|          | no brains, sometimes they just *do things*. When | P |   |
|          | the escalation die is odd, instead of making an  | * |   |
|          | attack or moving, roll a d6 to see what the      | * |   |
|          | cubahedron does. If an option is not viable (you |   |   |
|          | roll a 5 but there is no engulfed enemy), reroll |   |   |
|          | until you get a valid option.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1.** The cubahedron jiggles in place. Each     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy takes 5 acid damage. Each creature  |   |   |
|          | engulfed by the cube takes a --4 penalty to its  |   |   |
|          | saves until the end of its next turn.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2.** The cubahedron moves as a quick action.   |   |   |
|          | If the cube ends its move engaged with enemies,  |   |   |
|          | each of those enemies must roll a save; on a     |   |   |
|          | failure, the cubahedron grabs them (but they're  |   |   |
|          | not engulfed).                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **3.** The cubahedron spits an engulfed creature |   |   |
|          | into the air above it and makes a                |   |   |
|          | *shlup'n'schlorp* attack against that creature   |   |   |
|          | with a +5 attack bonus. Then the creature is     |   |   |
|          | engulfed again.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4.** The cubahedron flattens itself slightly   |   |   |
|          | and crawls up a wall and possibly across the     |   |   |
|          | ceiling. The cube falls at the end of its turn.  |   |   |
|          | Each creature engulfed by the cube takes 30      |   |   |
|          | damage, and it makes a *gel drop* attack against |   |   |
|          | enemies below it.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Gel drop +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby                |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---15 damage, and the cube engulfs the |   |   |
|          | target if it's smaller than the cube             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **5.** The cubahedron moves one creature         |   |   |
|          | engulfed by it to the surface. The target gains  |   |   |
|          | a +4 bonus to attempts to escape the cube, but   |   |   |
|          | each time the cube is targeted by an attack, the |   |   |
|          | engulfed creature must roll a save; on a         |   |   |
|          | failure, it becomes the target of the attack     |   |   |
|          | instead.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6.** The cubahedron spits out each enemy       |   |   |
|          | engulfed by it with great force in different     |   |   |
|          | directions; each of those creatures takes 50     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gelatinous Octahedron

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Shlup'n'schlorp +11 vs. PD**---38 acid damage, | A |   |
| level    | and the cube engulfs the target (functions like  | C | 1 |
|          | a grab; see below) if it's smaller than the cube | * | 9 |
| Blocker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The cube can make a *spasms* attack as a |   | 1 |
| Ooze     | free action.                                     | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Spasms +11 vs. AC (up | P | 2 |
|          | to 2 attacks, each against a different nearby    | D | 8 |
|          | enemy)**---19 damage                             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Engulf and dissolve:* Targets engulfed/grabbed  |   |   |
|          | by the cube take 38 acid damage at the start of  | * |   |
|          | the cube's turn but are not viable targets for   | * |   |
|          | additional attacks by the cube. Multiple targets | M |   |
|          | can be held within the cube simultaneously.      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Any engulfed creature that is also staggered     | * |   |
|          | must begin making last gasp saves or become      |   |   |
|          | paralyzed as the cube's toxins overwhelm it.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Instinctive actions:* Gelatinous creatures have | H |   |
|          | no brains, sometimes they just *do things*. When | P |   |
|          | the escalation die is odd, instead of making an  | * |   |
|          | attack or moving, roll a d8 to see what the      | * |   |
|          | octahedron does. If an option is not viable (you |   |   |
|          | roll a 3 but there are no nearby targets),       |   |   |
|          | reroll until you get a valid option.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1. C: Acid splash +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or    |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---8 ongoing acid   |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Each failed save:* Acid destroys one of the     |   |   |
|          | target's non-magical items. The target takes a   |   |   |
|          | cumulative --1 attack penalty until the end of   |   |   |
|          | the battle (boots fall apart, shield straps      |   |   |
|          | snap, etc.).                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 5 ongoing acid damage.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2.** The octahedron grows an orifice that      |   |   |
|          | gushes out a liquid glue that floods the area.   |   |   |
|          | Each enemy engaged with the octahedron is stuck  |   |   |
|          | (hard save ends, 16+). Each nearby enemy not     |   |   |
|          | engaged with the octahedron is stuck (save       |   |   |
|          | ends). Each faraway enemy is stuck (easy save    |   |   |
|          | ends, 6+). The glue has no effect on creatures   |   |   |
|          | who are flying or that have some way of avoiding |   |   |
|          | it.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **3.** The octahedron squirts a slick slime that |   |   |
|          | targets 1d3 nearby enemies. Until the end of the |   |   |
|          | battle, each target must roll an easy save each  |   |   |
|          | time it moves; on a failure, it's hampered until |   |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4.** The octahedron makes a *fire gout* attack |   |   |
|          | as it splashes out a gel that ignites in the air |   |   |
|          | and sticks to skin and clothing.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Fire gout +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or faraway |   |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---8 ongoing fire damage    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Each failed save:* The ongoing damage for all   |   |   |
|          | enemies hit by the attack increases by 1.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **5.** The octahedron sweats acid. Each enemy    |   |   |
|          | engaged with the octahedron must roll a normal   |   |   |
|          | save; on a failure, it takes 40 acid damage. On  |   |   |
|          | a success it takes 20 acid damage.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6. C: Acid jet +11 vs. PD (one nearby or       |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---45 acid damage                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 8 ongoing acid damage.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **7. C: Acid geyser +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or    |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies)**---30 acid damage, and the     |   |   |
|          | octahedron is propelled uncontrollably about the |   |   |
|          | area, passing next to each of its enemies.       |   |   |
|          | Unlike normal, each enemy can make an            |   |   |
|          | opportunity attack against the ooze as it moves  |   |   |
|          | this way, but the ooze can make a *glomp* attack |   |   |
|          | against those who do as a free action as it      |   |   |
|          | passes. (Tell the PCs that the ooze will get a   |   |   |
|          | counter-attack.)                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Glomp +9 vs. PD**---10 acid damage, and the    |   |   |
|          | cube engulfs the target if it's smaller than the |   |   |
|          | cube                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **8.** The octahedron splits into two            |   |   |
|          | tetrahedrons, and each one can act this turn     |   |   |
|          | (roll a d4 for the instinctive actions of each   |   |   |
|          | one). Divide the octahedron's current hit points |   |   |
|          | equally between the two new creatures.           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gelatinous Dodecahedron

+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge       | Initiative: +5                                 | * | 21 |
|            |                                                | * |    |
| 7th      | **Shlup'n'schlorp +10 vs. PD**---30 acid       | A | 19 |
| level      | damage, and the dodecahedron engulfs the       | C |    |
|            | target (functions like a grab; see below) if   | * | 16 |
| Blocker    | it's smaller than the dodecahedron             | * |    |
|            |                                                |   | 5  |
| Ooze       | *Miss:* The cube can make a *spasms* attack as | * | 50 |
|            | a free action.                                 | * |    |
|            |                                                | P |    |
|            | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Spasms +10 vs. AC   | D |    |
|            | (up to 2 attacks, each against a different     | * |    |
|            | nearby enemy)**---15 damage                    | * |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | *Engulf and dissolve:* Targets                 | * |    |
|            | engulfed/grabbed by the cube take 30 acid      | * |    |
|            | damage at the start of the cube's turn but are | M |    |
|            | not viable targets for additional attacks by   | D |    |
|            | the cube. Multiple targets can be held within  | * |    |
|            | the cube simultaneously.                       | * |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | Any engulfed creature that is also staggered   | * |    |
|            | must begin making last gasp saves or become    | * |    |
|            | paralyzed as the cube's toxins overwhelm it.   | H |    |
|            |                                                | P |    |
|            | *Instinctive actions:* Gelatinous creatures    | * |    |
|            | have no brains, sometimes they just *do        | * |    |
|            | things*. When the escalation die is odd,       |   |    |
|            | instead of making an attack or moving, roll a  |   |    |
|            | d12 to see what the dodecahedron does. If an   |   |    |
|            | option is not available (you roll a 1 but      |   |    |
|            | there are no nearby enemies), reroll until you |   |    |
|            | get a valid option.                            |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **1.** The dodecahedron makes a *squash*       |   |    |
|            | attack against 1d4 nearby enemies as it rolls  |   |    |
|            | and shlorps around the area. Any enemies       |   |    |
|            | already engulfed by the dodecahedron take 10   |   |    |
|            | thunder damage.                                |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **C: Squash +10 vs. PD (1d4 nearby             |   |    |
|            | enemies)**---20 damage, and the target is      |   |    |
|            | stunned (easy save ends, 6+)                   |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **2.** The dodecahedron throws out whip-like   |   |    |
|            | tendrils and makes a *sudden orifice* attack   |   |    |
|            | against each enemy engaged with it. Then it    |   |    |
|            | pulls each nearby enemy next to it and engages |   |    |
|            | that creature.                                 |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **Sudden orifice +12 vs. PD (each enemy        |   |    |
|            | engaged with it)**---The dodecahedron engulfs  |   |    |
|            | the target if it's smaller than the            |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron                                   |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **3.** Hundreds of finger-size slimes slither  |   |    |
|            | out from the interior of the dodecahedron and  |   |    |
|            | begin worming their way across the bodies of   |   |    |
|            | each of its enemies in the battle. Until the   |   |    |
|            | end of the battle, when a non-ooze creature    |   |    |
|            | takes any damage besides ongoing acid damage,  |   |    |
|            | it also takes 10 acid damage.                  |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **4.** The dodecahedron bounces and thrums.    |   |    |
|            | Each enemy engaged with it or engulfed by it   |   |    |
|            | must roll a save; on a failure, that enemy     |   |    |
|            | takes 30 thunder damage. On a success, it      |   |    |
|            | takes 15 thunder damage and pops free from the |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron.                                  |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **5.** The dodecahedron hunkers down and       |   |    |
|            | produces acidic spikes. It gains a +4 bonus to |   |    |
|            | all defenses until the end of the battle, and  |   |    |
|            | each enemy who makes a melee attack against it |   |    |
|            | with a non-magical weapon must roll a save; on |   |    |
|            | a failure the weapon dissolves. When a         |   |    |
|            | creature's weapon dissolves, that creature is  |   |    |
|            | hampered and weakened (save ends both).        |   |    |
|            | Magical weapons lose their bonuses to hit and  |   |    |
|            | damage until the end of the battle instead of  |   |    |
|            | being dissolved (but the owner is still        |   |    |
|            | hampered and weakened). They can be "restored" |   |    |
|            | after the battle by taking a few minutes       |   |    |
|            | during a rest to re-attune them.               |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **6.** The dodecahedron moves, rolling around  |   |    |
|            | the battlefield, then makes a                  |   |    |
|            | *shlup'n'schlorp* attack at the end of its     |   |    |
|            | movement with a +5 bonus. If the attack        |   |    |
|            | misses, instead of making a *spasms* attack    |   |    |
|            | the dodecahedron rolls about the area again    |   |    |
|            | and makes a second *shlup'n'schlorp* attack    |   |    |
|            | with a +10 bonus. If the second attack misses, |   |    |
|            | it doesn't get a spasms attack and the         |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron's turn ends.                      |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **7.** The dodecahedron makes a *spasms*       |   |    |
|            | attack. If it misses with either attack roll,  |   |    |
|            | after the attacks, it can make a *stretch and  |   |    |
|            | engulf* attack as a free action.               |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **C: Stretch and engulf +12 vs. PD (one nearby |   |    |
|            | or faraway enemy)**---30 acid damage, and the  |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron engulfs the target if it's        |   |    |
|            | smaller than the dodecahedron                  |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **8. C: Pseudopod slaps +10 vs. AC (one nearby |   |    |
|            | enemy)**---25 thunder damage                   |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | *Natural odd hit:* The target pops free from   |   |    |
|            | the dodecahedron and is knocked faraway, and   |   |    |
|            | the ooze makes the attack again against a      |   |    |
|            | different nearby enemy as a free action.       |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | *Natural even hit:* The dodecahedron engulfs   |   |    |
|            | the target if it's smaller than the            |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron.                                  |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **9.** Each enemy engulfed by the dodecahedron |   |    |
|            | takes 40 acid damage, and the dodecahedron     |   |    |
|            | heals 40 hp for each enemy it has engulfed.    |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **10.** The dodecahedron splits into an        |   |    |
|            | octahedron and a tetrahedron, and each one can |   |    |
|            | act this turn (roll a d8 and d4 for the        |   |    |
|            | *instinctive actions* of each one). Divide the |   |    |
|            | dodecahedron's current hit points into thirds, |   |    |
|            | and give one third to the tetrahedron and two  |   |    |
|            | thirds to the octahedron.                      |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **11.** The dodecahedron splits into three     |   |    |
|            | tetrahedrons, and each one can act this turn   |   |    |
|            | (roll a d4 for the *instinctive actions* of    |   |    |
|            | each one). Divide the dodecahedron's current   |   |    |
|            | hit points equally between the three new       |   |    |
|            | creatures.                                     |   |    |
|            |                                                |   |    |
|            | **12.** The dodecahedron splits into two       |   |    |
|            | cubahedrons, and each one can act this turn    |   |    |
|            | (roll a d6 for the *instinctive actions* of    |   |    |
|            | each one). Divide the dodecahedron's current   |   |    |
|            | hit points equally between the two new         |   |    |
|            | creatures.                                     |   |    |
+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|            |                                                |   |    |
+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Genie

#### Djinn

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Greatsword +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---40       | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* Increase the escalation | * |   |
|          | die by 1 (cumulative), and until the end of the  |   | 2 |
| Giant    | battle, the djinn adds the escalation die to its | * | 1 |
|          | attacks.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **C: Assault of the whirlwind +13 vs. PD (1d4 +  | D | 5 |
|          | 1 nearby creatures, including invisible          | * | 0 |
|          | creatures)**---35 damage, and after the attack   | * |   |
|          | the djinn teleports to one of the targets and    |   |   |
|          | engages it                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* The target is hampered  | M |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The djinn can only use this       | * |   |
|          | attack while it's not staggered.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Flight:* Genies fly extremely well, but lumber, | P |   |
|          | at best, when walking on the ground.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Grant-a-wish:* A PC whose attack drops a djinn  |   |   |
|          | to 0 hp gains the equivalent of an extremely     |   |   |
|          | favorable roll of 6 with an icon relationship    |   |   |
|          | die with an icon of the PC's choice that the PC  |   |   |
|          | already has a positive or conflicted             |   |   |
|          | relationship with. Treat this advantage as if it |   |   |
|          | came from a positive relationship. The GM is     |   |   |
|          | encouraged to treat this result with the utmost  |   |   |
|          | benevolence and compassion.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | If you want a djinn to be even tougher, add a    |   |   |
|          | nastier special depending on which icon or icons |   |   |
|          | the djinn is presently working for. The          |   |   |
|          | abilities represent the innate magic of the      |   |   |
|          | genie being channeled through the influence of   |   |   |
|          | the icon.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Magic or Religious Icon]{.underline}            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Protection boon:* While not staggered, the      |   |   |
|          | djinn gains *resist spell damage 16+* against    |   |   |
|          | all spells except those cast by a PC that has at |   |   |
|          | least a one point icon relationship with the     |   |   |
|          | Magic or Religious Icons.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Zealous Icon]{.underline}                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spiky bits:* When an enemy makes a melee attack |   |   |
|          | against the djinn and misses, it takes 2d20      |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Demonic Icon]{.underline}                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Demonic taint:* The djinn gains a random        |   |   |
|          | demonic feature from the Demonic Ability table.  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Underground Icon]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unwelcome resonance:* Whenever a nearby enemy   |   |   |
|          | attempts to trigger a magic item power, there's  |   |   |
|          | a 50% chance that the power fails. If it does,   |   |   |
|          | the item refuses to let its owner use that power |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Graceful or Draconic Icon]{.underline}          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sorcerous reach:* The djinn's *assault of the   |   |   |
|          | whirlwind* attack can also target faraway        |   |   |
|          | enemies.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Leader or Undead Icon]{.underline}              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Aura of command:* Twice per battle as a free    |   |   |
|          | action, the djinn can turn an ally's normal save |   |   |
|          | into an easy save (6+), or an enemy's normal     |   |   |
|          | save into a hard save (16+).                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nature or Trickster Icon]{.underline}           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wind/Shadow form:* While not staggered, the     |   |   |
|          | djinn has *resist melee damage 16+*.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Brute Icon]{.underline}                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Frenzied:* The djinn takes a --1 penalty to all |   |   |
|          | defenses. While not staggered, its crit range    |   |   |
|          | expands by 3.                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Efreet

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: cold (only while staggered)       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Blade of the perfect warrior +15 vs. AC (3     | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  | attacks)**---35 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Giant    | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* Each nearby enemy takes | * | 3 |
|          | 20 fire damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 4 |
|          | **R: Jet of absolute conflagration +15 vs. PD    | D | 2 |
|          | (one random nearby conscious enemy)**---110 fire | * | 0 |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* The target loses all    | * |   |
|          | fire resistance until the end of the battle and  | * |   |
|          | is hampered (save ends).                         | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Flight:* Efreet don't fly as well or as quickly | * |   |
|          | as djinn, but they are able to get around okay.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Grant-a-wish:* A PC whose attack drops an       | * |   |
|          | efreet to 0 hp gains the equivalent of an        | * |   |
|          | extremely favorable roll of 6 with an icon       | H |   |
|          | relationship die with an icon of the PC's choice | P |   |
|          | that the PC already has a positive or conflicted | * |   |
|          | relationship with. Treat this advantage as if it | * |   |
|          | came from a positive relationship. The GM is     |   |   |
|          | encouraged to treat this result with the utmost  |   |   |
|          | benevolence and compassion.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 18+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | If you want an efreet to be even tougher, add a  |   |   |
|          | nastier special depending on which icon or icons |   |   |
|          | the efreet is presently working for. The         |   |   |
|          | abilities represent the innate magic of the      |   |   |
|          | genie being channeled through the influence of   |   |   |
|          | the icon.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Magic or Religious Icon]{.underline}            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reinforced aura/spirit:* The efreet gains a +1  |   |   |
|          | bonus to MD and has no vulnerability to cold     |   |   |
|          | while staggered.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Zealous Icon]{.underline}                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spiky bits:* When an enemy makes a melee attack |   |   |
|          | against the efreet and misses, it takes 2d20     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Demonic Icon]{.underline}                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Demonic taint:* The efreet gains a random       |   |   |
|          | demonic feature from the Demonic Ability table.  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Underground or Undead Icon]{.underline}         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stone slumbers:* When the escalation die is 4+  |   |   |
|          | at the start of a round, reset the escalation    |   |   |
|          | value by rolling it.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Graceful or Draconic Icon]{.underline}          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Energy transformation:* The efreet can choose   |   |   |
|          | to deal lightning damage instead of fire damage  |   |   |
|          | with its attacks.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Leader Icon]{.underline}                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Iconic mark:* While not staggered, the efreet   |   |   |
|          | gains *resist damage 16+* against enemies that   |   |   |
|          | have a positive or conflicted relationship with  |   |   |
|          | the efreet's icon.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nature or Trickster Icon]{.underline}           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wind/Shadow form:* While not staggered, the     |   |   |
|          | efreet gains *resist melee damage 16+*.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Brute Icon]{.underline}                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Frenzied:* The efreet takes a --1 penalty to    |   |   |
|          | all defenses. While not staggered, its crit      |   |   |
|          | range expands by 3.                              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ghost

[Abilities for Most Ghosts]{.underline}

Most ghosts have several or all of the following abilities. Normally we
use these sections to cover abilities possessed by all the monsters of a
certain type, but there's enough variation in ghost stories that we
figure we should provide tools for you to choose from rather than try to
force ghosts into one style of haunting.

For the record, all ghosts also have some version of the *ghostly*
ability, but its strength varies so we've put it into each stat block.

*Bound hauntings:* Most ghosts are bound to an area, usually the area of
their death. This ability won't come up much in play, but it does make
it seem likely that ghosts can be easier to get away from than other
monsters. Move far enough fast enough and the ghost returns to the area
it's bound to. Occasionally festivals for the dead or other rituals can
call bound ghosts from their hauntings, but those are unusual and
temporary circumstances.

**Exceptions:** There may be ghosts that are bound to people, or events,
or phenomena that travel. There might even be ghosts that aren't bound
to anything, but at that stage there are several other questions that
surface and odd magical, iconic, or unique intervention seems likely.

*Flight:* Most ghosts fly, though some may be quite slow, seeming to
drift or walking on air. Ghosts that fly in unusual ways will be flagged
with their own abilities.

**Exceptions:** Not all ghosts fly. Some seem constrained to act much
like they acted when they were alive, and flying wasn't part of their
life package.

*Unnatural touch:* Many ghosts can alter the temperature of their
environment to more closely match the underworld or afterlife that
they've so far evaded. Sometimes that's icy cold, sometimes that's
burning hot, and sometimes it's just kind of normal, which would go
unnoticed unless the ghost is somewhere abnormal!

**Exceptions:** This is more of a special effect of ghost stories than
part of a creature's combat abilities, and you can safely ignore it
unless you find telling moments when it adds to the game.

#### Sadsack

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +1                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 2nd     | **Jarring touch +7 vs AC**---4 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 2-5:* Target is hampered (save ends).    | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Contagious ennui:* Each enemy that misses an     |   | 1 |
| Undead    | attack with a natural odd roll this battle takes  | * | 3 |
|           | a -2 penalty to all its defenses until they score | * |   |
|           | a critical hit or the sadsack is reduced to 0 hit | P | 2 |
|           | points. (As usual, this ability does not stack.)  | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 12+*  | * |   |
|           | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can     |   |   |
|           | move through solid objects, but can't end its     | * |   |
|           | turn inside them.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Relic affinity:* Sadsacks are also vulnerable to | D |   |
|           | the type of weapon or attack that ended their     | * |   |
|           | lives. Interpret this liberally, GM.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Gravity does not influence sadsacks     | * |   |
|           | unless they are staggered. When they're           | * |   |
|           | staggered, they sink to the ground and stay       | H |   |
|           | there.                                            | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lesser Haunting

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Terrible touch +7 vs. PD**---4 negative energy  | * | 6 |
| Mook      | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Mob-based:* For every separate mob of lesser     | * | 3 |
|           | haunting mooks in the battle (mobs start with at  | * |   |
|           | least four mooks), add a +1 bonus to the lesser   | P | 9 |
|           | haunting's attacks and damage.                    | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 14+*  | * |   |
|           | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can     |   |   |
|           | move through solid objects, but can't end its     | * |   |
|           | turn inside them.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Fear-boosters:* While there are three or more    | D |   |
|           | lesser haunting mooks in a battle, the fear       | * |   |
|           | abilities of their allies affect enemies with     | * |   |
|           | half again as many hit points as usual. (For      |   |   |
|           | example, a 3rd level hungrymouth ghost normally | * |   |
|           | has a fear threshold of 15 hit points. When there | * |   |
|           | are three or more lesser haunting mooks in the    | H |   |
|           | battle, the hungrymouth ghost's fear threshold    | P |   |
|           | bumps up to 22 hit points.)                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hungry Mouth Ghost

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Horrible fingernails +10 vs. AC**---14 damage   | * | 7 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Target is stuck (save ends).  |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | **Distending jaw +10 vs. PD (stuck target)**---24 | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 10 ongoing fire damage.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Exploding pustules +10 vs. PD (2 random      |   |   |
|           | nearby enemies)**---22 fire damage                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 5 ongoing fire damage.        | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle while staggered.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 14+*  |   |   |
|           | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can     | * |   |
|           | move through solid objects, but can't end its     | * |   |
|           | turn inside them.                                 | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fearsome jaws:* After using its *distending jaw* |   |   |
|           | attack, the hungry mouth ghost has a fear ability |   |   |
|           | against engaged enemies with fewer than 30 hit    |   |   |
|           | points.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Petulant Never-Was

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Ghostly staff +10 vs. PD**---26 negative       | * | 5 |
| Caster   | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Natural even hit:* Petulant never-was can make  | * | 8 |
|          | a *disparaging rummage* attack as a free action  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Flashy zaps +10 vs. PD (1 or 2 nearby       | D | 2 |
|          | targets)**---28 energy damage (damage is either  | * | 3 |
|          | force OR a type of energy most recently used by  | * |   |
|          | an enemy spellcaster, as the petulant never-was  |   |   |
|          | demonstrates that they also control that energy  | * |   |
|          | type)                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* Petulant never-was takes 3d6 | D |   |
|          | damage that ignores its ghostly resistance.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Disparaging rummage +10 vs. MD (nearby      |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---10 ongoing psychic damage and         | * |   |
|          | hampered (save ends both); hampered part of the  | * |   |
|          | effect only affects spellcasters!                | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+* |   |   |
|          | to all damage except holy damage AND force       |   |   |
|          | damage. A ghost can move through solid objects,  |   |   |
|          | but can't end its turn inside them.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Iconic sadsack:* Each enemy that has one or     |   |   |
|          | more icon relationship points with the Magic     |   |   |
|          | Icon that misses an attack with a natural odd    |   |   |
|          | roll takes a -2 penalty to all its defenses      |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Disgraced Legionnaire

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Ghostly sword +13 vs. PD**---40 negative       | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Natural even hit or miss:* Disgraced            | * | 6 |
|          | legionnaire can make a *confusing orders* attack | * |   |
|          | as a free action                                 | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | **C: Confusing orders +11 vs. MD (nearby         | * | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---5 ongoing psychic damage and target's | * |   |
|          | weapon attacks do not add the escalation die     |   |   |
|          | (save ends both)                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Critical hit:* Target is also confused (same    | M |   |
|          | save ends).                                      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 12+* | * |   |
|          | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can    | * |   |
|          | move through solid objects, but can't end its    | H |   |
|          | turn inside them.                                | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Iconic sadsack:* Each enemy that has one or     | * |   |
|          | more icon relationship points with the Leader    |   |   |
|          | Icon that misses an attack with a natural odd    |   |   |
|          | roll takes a -2 penalty to all its defenses      |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Major Haunting

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Terrible touch +10 vs. PD**---8 negative energy | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| Mook      | *Mob-based:* For every separate mob of major      | * |   |
|           | haunting mooks in the battle (mobs start with at  |   | 1 |
| Undead    | least four mooks), add a +1 bonus to the major    | * | 6 |
|           | haunting's attacks and +2 to its damage.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 14+*  | D | 8 |
|           | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can     | * |   |
|           | move through solid objects, but can't end its     | * |   |
|           | turn inside them.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fear-boosters:* While there are three or more    | * |   |
|           | lesser or major haunting mooks in a battle, the   | M |   |
|           | fear abilities of their allies affect enemies     | D |   |
|           | with half again as many hit points as usual.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Twisted Soul

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Disturbing caress +12 vs. PD**---36 negative   | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | *Natural even hit:* Twisted soul can make a      | * | 0 |
|          | *weird muttering* attack as a free action.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **C: Weird muttering +12 vs. MD (one random      | D | 0 |
|          | nearby enemy)**---10 ongoing psychic damage and  | * | 0 |
|          | if engaged with an enemy, target must use its    | * |   |
|          | next move action on its turn attempting to       |   |   |
|          | disengage (save ends both)                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 12+* | * |   |
|          | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can    | * |   |
|          | move through solid objects, but can't end its    |   |   |
|          | turn inside them.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Iconic sadsack:* Each enemy that has one or     | H |   |
|          | more icon relationship points with the Demonic   | P |   |
|          | Icon that misses an attack with a natural odd    | * |   |
|          | roll takes a -2 penalty to all its defenses      | * |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Epic Haunting

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 9th     | **Terrible touch +13 vs. PD**---20 negative       | A |   |
| level     | energy damage                                     | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| Mook      | *Mob-based:* For every separate mob of epic       | * |   |
|           | haunting mooks in the battle (mobs start with at  |   | 1 |
| Undead    | least four mooks), add a +1 bonus to the epic     | * | 9 |
|           | haunting's attacks and +5 to its damage.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 14+*  | D | 6 |
|           | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can     | * |   |
|           | move through solid objects, but can't end its     | * |   |
|           | turn inside them.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fear-boosters:* While there are three or more    | * |   |
|           | lesser, major, or epic haunting mooks in a        | M |   |
|           | battle, the fear abilities of their allies affect | D |   |
|           | enemies with half again as many hit points as     | * |   |
|           | usual.                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Most Hungry Ghost

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Horrible fingernails +15 vs. AC**---50 damage  | * | 2 |
| Blocker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is stuck (save ends). |   | 2 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **Distending jaw +15 vs. PD (stuck               | * |   |
|          | target)**---85 damage                            | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 15 ongoing fire damage.      | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Exploding pustules +15 vs. PD (2 random     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---80 fire damage               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 10 ongoing fire damage.      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle while staggered.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 14+* |   |   |
|          | to all damage except holy damage. A ghost can    | * |   |
|          | move through solid objects, but can't end its    | * |   |
|          | turn inside them.                                | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fearsome jaws:* After using its *distending     |   |   |
|          | jaw* attack, the hungry mouth ghost has a fear   |   |   |
|          | ability against engaged enemies with fewer than  |   |   |
|          | 96 hit points.                                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ghoul

For nastier specials, instead of a slow, poisonous bite, a more deadly
bite can also make things challenging for adventurers. Each time a ghoul
bites a character, that PC immediately loses a recovery. If they run out
of recoveries before their next full heal-up, that character must start
making last gasp saves at the start of each battle. If the character
fails their fourth last gasp save this way, they turn into a ghoul.

#### Gravemeat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Dirtcaked claw +5 vs. AC**---3 damage, or 6     | * | 2 |
| Mook      | damage if the target is vulnerable                | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Natural 18+:* The gravemeat can make another     | * | 0 |
|           | *dirtcaked claw* attack as a free action, then it | * |   |
|           | takes 1d6 damage from the exertion.               | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Newly-Risen Ghoul

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Scrabbling claws +7 vs. AC**---3 damage         | * | 5 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is vulnerable (*attacks |   | 1 |
| Undead    | vs. it have crit range expanded by 2*) to attacks | * | 1 |
|           | by undead until the end of the ghoul's next turn. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Pound of flesh:* The newly-risen ghoul's         | D |   |
|           | *scrabbling claws* attack deals +2 damage against | * |   |
|           | vulnerable targets.                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ghoul

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claws and bite +8 vs. AC**---8 damage           | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is vulnerable      |   | 1 |
| Undead    | (*attacks vs. it have crit range expanded by 2*)  | * | 2 |
|           | to attacks by undead until the end of the ghoul's | * |   |
|           | next turn.                                        | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *Pound of flesh:* The ghoul's *claws and bite*    | * |   |
|           | attack deals +4 damage against vulnerable         | * |   |
|           | targets.                                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Infected bite:* Any creature that is slain by a  | * |   |
|           | ghoul and not consumed will rise as a ghoul the   | M |   |
|           | next night.                                       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Paralyzing bite:* When the ghoul hits a          | * |   |
|           | vulnerable target with a natural even attack      | * |   |
|           | roll, the target is also stunned (save ends).     | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ghoul Fleshripper

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Bony claws +7 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---6 damage,  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | and the target is vulnerable (save ends)          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Critical hit:* Until the target saves against    | * | 3 |
|           | the vulnerable effect, it also takes 2d6 ongoing  | * |   |
|           | damage each turn.                                 | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Infected bite:* Any creature that is slain by a  | * |   |
|           | ghoul and not consumed will rise as a ghoul the   | * |   |
|           | next night.                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ghoul Licklash

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | Vulnerable: holy                                  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Bloody claws +8 vs. AC**---12 damage, and       | * | 7 |
| Blocker   | target is vulnerable (save ends)                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | **C: Flesh-seeking tongue +8 vs. PD (one nearby   | * | 3 |
|           | enemy)**---8 damage                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target pops free from     | D | 8 |
|           | each enemy it's engaged with and is pulled to the | * |   |
|           | ghoul licklash, who engages it.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is vulnerable (save | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Critical hit:* The licklash can make a           | D |   |
|           | *flesh-seeking tongue* attack against a different | * |   |
|           | target as a free action.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Infected bite:* Any creature that is slain by a  | * |   |
|           | ghoul and not consumed will rise as a ghoul the   | * |   |
|           | next night.                                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Tongue lash:* Once per round when a nearby enemy | * |   |
|           | makes a ranged attack, the ghoul licklash can     | * |   |
|           | make a *flesh-seeking tongue* attack against that |   |   |
|           | enemy before the attack as a free action.         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ghoul Pusbuster

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | Vulnerable: holy                                  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Feeble claws +8 vs. AC**---9 damage             | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Vomit comet +8 vs. PD (1d3 nearby            |   | 1 |
| Undead    | enemies)**---10 ongoing damage, and the target is | * | 3 |
|           | vulnerable (save ends both)                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save  | D | 0 |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is dazed (save      |   |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Self-diminishing:* The ghoul pusbuster takes 2d6 | M |   |
|           | damage for each creature it targets with this     | D |   |
|           | attack.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ghast

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 5th     | **Finely honed claws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---8 | A |   |
| level     | damage, and the target is vulnerable (save ends)  | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | **Paralyzing bite +11 vs. AC (one vulnerable      | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---12 damage, and the target is stunned   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | (save ends)                                       | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Hungry howl +11 vs. MD (each nearby          | P | 7 |
|           | enemy)**---The target must choose one: 15 psychic | D | 4 |
|           | damage; OR 5 psychic damage and the target is     | * |   |
|           | vulnerable (save ends)                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Giant

#### Hill Giant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Massive gnarly club +10 vs. AC**---45 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss that's a natural 6+:* Half damage.         | * | 0 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Two-handed boulder throw +8 vs. PD**---35   |   | 1 |
| Giant    | damage                                           | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Big bully:* The giant deals double damage with  | * | 0 |
|          | its attacks against staggered targets.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ice Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: fire, holy                        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Chill claws +11 vs. AC**---12 cold damage      | * | 2 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Icy breath of the grave +11 vs. PD**---9 cold  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | damage, and the target is vulnerable to cold     | * | 3 |
|          | attacks (save ends)                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Resist cold 18+:* When a cold attack targets    | D | 0 |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 18+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fiery decapitation:* Ice zombies have frozen,   | * |   |
|          | iron-hard flesh that makes them tougher than     | M |   |
|          | normal zombies---critical hits that deal fire    | D |   |
|          | damage deal triple damage to ice zombies; other  | * |   |
|          | critical hits just deal double damage.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jotun Auroch

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +7                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Trampling hooves +8 vs. PD**---6 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 1--5:* The jotun auroch can make a      | * | 8 |
| Mook     | *fiery or frosty breath* attack as a free        | * |   |
|          | action.                                          |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Fiery or Frosty       | * |   |
|          | breath +10 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies)**---5     | P | 7 |
|          | fire or cold damage, depending on what the jotun | D | 0 |
|          | auroch has been eating lately                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold and fire 18+:* When a cold or fire  |   |   |
|          | attack targets this creature, the attacker must  | * |   |
|          | roll a natural 18+ on the attack roll or it only | * |   |
|          | deals half damage.                               | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Winter Beast

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +7                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Fang, claw, or tusk +11 vs. AC**---21 damage,  | A |   |
| level    | and the beast's special ability triggers         | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Troop    | [Winter Beast Special Ability: Choose            | * |   |
|          | ONE]{.underline}                                 |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Armored polar bear:* The target takes 10 extra  | * |   |
|          | damage, and if the target makes an opportunity   | P | 1 |
|          | attack against the polar bear before the start   | D | 7 |
|          | of the bear's next turn, the bear can make a     | * | 0 |
|          | *fang, claw, or tusk* attack against the target  | * |   |
|          | as a free action.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Giant walrus:* The target takes 14 extra damage | * |   |
|          | and is stuck (save ends; also ends if the walrus | M |   |
|          | moves).                                          | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Winter wolf:* The target takes 14 extra damage, | * |   |
|          | or 28 extra damage if another winter wolf is     |   |   |
|          | engaged with it.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 12+:* When a cold attack targets    | H |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | P |   |
|          | 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bergship Raider (Frost)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Whirling ice hook +13 vs. AC**---50 damage,    | * | 0 |
| Spoiler  | and the target takes a --5 penalty to disengage  | * |   |
|          | checks until the end of its next turn            |   | 1 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage to each enemy engaged with the | * |   |
|          | giant.                                           | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | **R: Frost chain +13 vs. AC (one nearby enemy or | * | 0 |
|          | faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---40 damage, and the | * |   |
|          | target is pulled next to the giant, who engages  |   |   |
|          | it                                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ancient cold:* While battling one or more frost | M |   |
|          | giants, there is only a 50% chance that the      | D |   |
|          | escalation die increases at the start of the     | * |   |
|          | round.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | H |   |
|          | damage.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Winter's bite:* When the escalation die is odd, | * |   |
|          | each enemy engaged with the raider takes 35 cold |   |   |
|          | damage at the start of its turn.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Overbearing:* Twice per battle, the raider can  |   |   |
|          | make a *knockdown* attack as a quick action      |   |   |
|          | (once per round).                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Knockdown +10 vs. PD (one enemy smaller than   |   |   |
|          | it)**---20 damage, and the target can't          |   |   |
|          | disengage until the end of its next turn.        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cloud Giant Magician

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | **Staff +10 vs. AC( 2 attacks)**---40 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **R: Sleep, little ones +12 vs. MD (one nearby   | * | 9 |
| Caster   | enemy, or 1d3 enemies in a group if the          | * |   |
|          | escalation die is 3+)**---20 psychic damage, and |   | 2 |
| Giant    | if the target has 50 hp or fewer after the       | * | 2 |
|          | attack, it falls unconscious (hard save ends,    | * |   |
|          | 16+; it also ends if the target takes 10 or more | P | 2 |
|          | damage)                                          | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: Zzzzzottttttttttt! +12 vs. PD**---35 force  | * |   |
|          | damage, and 35 ongoing lightning damage          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 force damage, and 20 ongoing          | * |   |
|          | lightning damage.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Strike with advantage:* A cloud giant gains a   | * |   |
|          | +4 attack bonus against any enemy taking ongoing | * |   |
|          | damage or that has an ongoing condition          |   |   |
|          | (unconscious sleep, for instance).               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cloud Giant Thane

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Cloud-forged morningstar +12 vs. AC**---60     | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit:* The target loses any         | * |   |
|          | *flight* abilities and can't gain *flight* in    |   | 2 |
| Giant    | any way (save ends).                             | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Natural odd hit or miss: The thane can make a    | P | 2 |
|          | *chains and shrapnel* attack as a free action.   | D | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **C: Chains and shrapnel +12 vs. AC (1d4 random  | * |   |
|          | nearby creatures)**---20 damage                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Strike with advantage:* A cloud giant gains a   | * |   |
|          | +4 attack bonus against any enemy taking ongoing | M |   |
|          | damage or that has an ongoing condition (dazed,  | D |   |
|          | for instance).                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cloud Giant Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Sword or spear +12 vs. AC (up to 2             | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---40 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Troop    | *Natural 16+:* The target is dazed (save ends).  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | **R: Hurled spear +12 vs. AC (up to 3 enemies in | * | 8 |
|          | a group with a single spear)**---20 damage       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Strike with advantage:* A cloud giant gains a   | D | 0 |
|          | +4 attack bonus against any enemy taking ongoing | * | 0 |
|          | damage or that has an ongoing condition (dazed,  | * |   |
|          | for instance).                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frost Giant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Ice-covered war axe +12 vs. AC**---45 damage   | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The giant can make a |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *frost touch* attack against the target as a     | * | 7 |
|          | free action.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Frost touch +11 vs.      | D | 1 |
|          | PD**---10 cold damage, and the target is         | * | 0 |
|          | hampered until the end of its next turn          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Large rock or iceball +11 vs. PD (one       | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy or faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---35 | * |   |
|          | damage                                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Ancient cold:* While battling one or more frost | * |   |
|          | giants, there is only a 50% chance that the      | * |   |
|          | escalation die increases at the start of the     |   |   |
|          | round.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    | H |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | P |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Strength of giants:* Twice per battle, the      |   |   |
|          | giant can make a *slam* attack as a quick action |   |   |
|          | (once per round).                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Slam +10 vs. PD (one enemy smaller than        |   |   |
|          | it)**---20 damage, the target pops free from the |   |   |
|          | giant, and the target loses its next move action |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ice Sorceress (Frost)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Icicle staff +14 vs. AC**---20 damage, 20 cold | * | 2 |
| Caster   | damage, and the sorceress can make an *icy       | * |   |
|          | delusions* attack against the target as a free   |   | 1 |
| Giant    | action                                           | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Winter wind +14 vs. PD**---55 cold damage   | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 9 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The sorceress can    | * | 0 |
|          | make an *icy delusions* attack against the       | * |   |
|          | target as a free action.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Icy delusions +14 vs. | * |   |
|          | MD (one enemy)**---At the start of each round,   | M |   |
|          | the target loses 2d6 points from their           | D |   |
|          | initiative count as they slowly freeze from the  | * |   |
|          | inside out (save ends)                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Frozen flesh:* When a creature is reduced to 0  | * |   |
|          | initiative or lower from *icy delusions*, it     | * |   |
|          | becomes delusional and frozen and must choose    | H |   |
|          | one condition that will affect it: confused      | P |   |
|          | (hard save ends, 16+); OR stunned (save ends).   | * |   |
|          | After saving, the creature rerolls its           | * |   |
|          | initiative.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ice summoner:* Once per round as a free action, |   |   |
|          | the giant can make an *ice wall* attack to       |   |   |
|          | conjure forth a wall of ice that stops one       |   |   |
|          | enemy\'s movement or ranged attack. The giant    |   |   |
|          | can't use this ability to target creatures       |   |   |
|          | making fire attacks or wielding weapons that     |   |   |
|          | deal fire damage.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Ice wall +14 vs. PD (one moving enemy or    |   |   |
|          | ranged attacker)**---The target stops its        |   |   |
|          | movement or loses its ranged attack that turn,   |   |   |
|          | and the wall of ice remains until the end of the |   |   |
|          | battle (GM's choice on its size, but it          |   |   |
|          | shouldn't be too large or thick; normal DC to    |   |   |
|          | break through it)                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ancient cold:* While battling one or more frost |   |   |
|          | giants, there is only a 50% chance that the      |   |   |
|          | escalation die increases at the start of the     |   |   |
|          | round.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ice armor:* The ice sorceress has *resist       |   |   |
|          | damage 16+* unless the attack deals fire damage. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Giant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Flaming greatsword +13 vs. AC (2               | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | attacks)**---35 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target also      | * | 7 |
|          | takes 10 ongoing fire damage.                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **R: Flaming black-iron javelin +11 vs.          | D | 8 |
|          | AC**---40 damage                                 | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target also      |   |   |
|          | takes 10 ongoing fire damage.                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fiery escalator:* The fire giant adds the       | M |   |
|          | escalation die to its attacks against targets    | D |   |
|          | taking ongoing fire damage.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Burning blood:* When a fire giant becomes       |   |   |
|          | staggered, it deals 10 ongoing fire damage to    |   |   |
|          | each enemy engaged with it.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Strength of giants:* Twice per battle, the      |   |   |
|          | giant can make a *slam* attack as a quick action |   |   |
|          | (once per round).                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Slam +12 vs. PD (one enemy smaller than        |   |   |
|          | it)**---10 damage, the target pops free from the |   |   |
|          | giant, and the target loses its next move        |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frost Giant Adventurer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Overlarge club +13 vs. AC (one nearby enemy or | * | 3 |
| Spoiler  | one enemy engaged with giant)**---75 damage      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *Natural even hit:* The target loses its next    | * | 8 |
|          | move action, and if it's engaged with the giant, | * |   |
|          | it pops free.                                    | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Ancient cold:* While battling one or more frost | * | 0 |
|          | giants, there is only a 50% chance that the      | * |   |
|          | escalation die increases at the start of the     |   |   |
|          | round.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Blood of the niefelheim:* When an enemy the     | M |   |
|          | frost giant adventurer is engaged with scores a  | D |   |
|          | critical hit against the giant, that enemy is    | * |   |
|          | hampered (hard save ends, 16+).                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | H |   |
|          | damage.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Stone Giant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Stone club +13 vs. AC**---50 damage            | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The stone giant can  | * | 2 |
| Troop    | also make a *stomp* attack against a single      | * |   |
|          | target as a free action.                         |   | 1 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | **Stomp +13 vs. PD (each smaller enemy engaged   | * |   |
|          | with the giant)**---30 damage, and the target is | P | 2 |
|          | dazed (save ends)                                | D | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: Thrown boulder +11 vs. PD (one nearby or    | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---40 damage                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 20 damage.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Built of stone:* The stone giant has *resist    | D |   |
|          | weapons 16+*.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Fire Giant Warlord

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 9th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Flaming greatsword +15 vs. AC (2               | * | 2 |
| Leader   | attacks)**---40 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target also      | * | 8 |
|          | takes 10 ongoing fire damage.                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **Massive strike +15 vs. AC**---90 damage, and   | D | 5 |
|          | 10 ongoing fire damage                           | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fiery escalator:* The fire giant warlord adds   |   |   |
|          | the escalation die to its attacks against        | * |   |
|          | targets taking ongoing fire damage.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    | D |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Warlord of fire:* As a standard action, the     | * |   |
|          | warlord can command one nearby ally that has     | H |   |
|          | resistance to fire to make a melee attack as a   | P |   |
|          | free action.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unquenchable fires:* Enemies engaged with the   |   |   |
|          | fire giant warlord take a --5 penalty to saves   |   |   |
|          | against ongoing fire damage.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Storm Giant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | **Truly enormous greatsword +15 vs. AC**---120   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Archer   | *Natural even hit or miss:* The giant can make a | * |   |
|          | *lightning bolt* attack against a random nearby  |   | 2 |
| Giant    | enemy as a free action.                          | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 40 damage OR the giant can make a        | P | 6 |
|          | *release the thunder* attack as a free action.   | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: Giant longbow +14 vs. AC (2 attacks vs.     | * |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies)**---60 damage         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The giant can make a         | * |   |
|          | *lightning bolt* attack against a random enemy   | M |   |
|          | that is nearby the target of the longbow attack. | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Lightning bolt +15    | * |   |
|          | vs. PD (one random nearby enemy)**---2d6 × 10    |   |   |
|          | lightning damage                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Release the thunder   | * |   |
|          | +15 vs. PD (all nearby creatures)**---1d10       | * |   |
|          | thunder damage per *building thunder* point (see |   |   |
|          | below).                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Building thunder:* Keep count of the number of  |   |   |
|          | times the storm giant uses its *lightning bolt*  |   |   |
|          | attack during the battle. Add that number to the |   |   |
|          | escalation die to get the current building       |   |   |
|          | thunder value.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Skystep:* A storm giant can use its standard    |   |   |
|          | action to walk or run through the air, using     |   |   |
|          | move actions to continue. If the storm giant     |   |   |
|          | makes a standard action attack, it settles back  |   |   |
|          | to the ground below it without falling.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Storm born:* The storm giant has *resist        |   |   |
|          | thunder 16+* and *resist lightning 16+*.         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Gibbering Mouther

[Abilities for All Gibbering Mouthers]{.underline}

Gibbering mouthers have the following abilities:

*Eyes everywhere:* Gibbering mouthers can't be ambushed or sneaked up
on.

In addition, though gibbering mouthers are aberrations they are
ooze-like enough that they use the ooze abilities flows where it likes
and ooze.

*Flows where it likes:* The gibbering mouther is immune to opportunity
attacks.

*Ooze:* The gibbering mouther is immune to effects. When an attack
applies a condition to a gibbering mouther (dazed, hampered, weakened,
ongoing damage, etc.), that condition doesn't affect it.

#### Gibbering Mouther

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Tearing mouths +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---4      | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   | *Natural 19+:* Target is grabbed.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| A         | **C: Pseudopod grasp +9 vs. PD (1 nearby          | * | 2 |
| berration | enemy)**---Target is grabbed and moved into       | * |   |
|           | engagement with the gibbering mouther             | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Absorb +9 vs. PD (one grabbed enemy)**---10     |   |   |
|           | acid damage and the crit range for this attack    | * |   |
|           | expands by 1 until the end of the battle (down to | * |   |
|           | a maximum of 16+)                                 | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Miss:* 4 acid damage.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Crit:* Target must begin making last gasp saves  |   |   |
|           | as it is slowly absorbed. Absorbed creatures      | * |   |
|           | can't be resurrected by normal means.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | **C: Gibbering insanity +9 vs. MD (one random     | P |   |
|           | nearby enemy)**---Target is shocked (save ends)   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Aftereffect:* The next time this battle that the |   |   |
|           | target saves against shocked it is an easy save   |   |   |
|           | (6+).                                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Insane terrain:* A gibbering mouther causes      |   |   |
|           | surrounding rocks and dirt to soften. On rounds   |   |   |
|           | when the escalation die is odd characters must    |   |   |
|           | succeed at a save (11+) when they attempt to move |   |   |
|           | or their movement ends and they become stuck      |   |   |
|           | (save ends).                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Stone to flesh:* A gibbering mouther that also   |   |   |
|           | has the *insane terrain* nastier special slowly   |   |   |
|           | turns the softening terrain to flesh, then        |   |   |
|           | absorbs it. When the escalation die becomes 6,    |   |   |
|           | the die flips straight back to 1 and the          |   |   |
|           | gibbering mouther heals up to half its full hit   |   |   |
|           | points.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Atrocious Gibbering Mouther

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Tearing mouths +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---11   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 19+:* Target is grabbed.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Ab       | **C: Pseudopod grasp +11 vs. PD (1 nearby        | * | 4 |
| erration | enemy)**---Target is grabbed and moved into      | * |   |
|          | engagement with the gibbering mouther            | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Absorb +11 vs. PD (up to two grabbed           |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---20 acid damage and the crit range   | * |   |
|          | for this attack expands by 1 (to a maximum of    | * |   |
|          | 11+)                                             | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 acid damage.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* Target must start making last gasp saves |   |   |
|          | as they are slowly absorbed. Absorbed creatures  | * |   |
|          | can't be resurrected by normal means.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | **C: Gibbering insanity +11 vs. MD (2 random     | P |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---Target is shocked (save      | * |   |
|          | ends)                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Really insane terrain:* A gibbering mouther     |   |   |
|          | causes surrounding rocks and dirt to soften. On  |   |   |
|          | rounds when the escalation die is odd characters |   |   |
|          | must succeed at a save (11+) when they attempt   |   |   |
|          | to move or their movement ends and they become   |   |   |
|          | stuck (save ends). On turns when the ground      |   |   |
|          | softens the gibbering mouther can move once on   |   |   |
|          | its turn as a quick action, as well as once as a |   |   |
|          | move action.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stone to flesh:* A gibbering mouther that also  |   |   |
|          | has the *insane terrain* nastier special slowly  |   |   |
|          | turns the softening terrain to flesh, then       |   |   |
|          | absorbs it. When the escalation die becomes 6,   |   |   |
|          | the die flips straight back to 1 and the         |   |   |
|          | gibbering mouther heals up to half its full hit  |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Gnoll

[Nastier Special for all gnolls:]{.underline}

*Blood fury:* +1d10 melee damage if the gnoll or its target is
staggered.

#### Gnoll Ranger

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Hand axes +6 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---6 damage    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Pack ferocity:* If more than one gnoll is        | * | 7 |
| Archer    | engaged with the target, each gnoll melee attack  | * |   |
|           | that misses that target deals half damage.        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | **R: Longbow +8 vs. AC**---8 damage               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The gnoll can make a  | D | 6 |
|           | second *longbow* attack (no more) as a free       | * |   |
|           | action.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Quick shot:* When the gnoll ranger is unengaged  | * |   |
|           | and an enemy moves to engage it, roll a d20. On a | * |   |
|           | 11+, the gnoll ranger can make a *longbow* attack | M |   |
|           | against that enemy as a free action just before   | D |   |
|           | being engaged.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Hates everyone:* The crit range of attacks by    | * |   |
|           | gnoll rangers expands by 2 against humanoids.     | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gnoll Savage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Spear +7 vs. AC**---10 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Pack ferocity:* If more than one gnoll is        | * | 6 |
| Troop     | engaged with the target, each gnoll melee attack  | * |   |
|           | that misses that target deals half damage.        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | **R: Thrown spear +6 vs. AC**---8 damage          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gnoll War Leader

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Heavy flail +9 vs. AC**---14 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target is marked  | * | 7 |
| Leader    | for death; until the end of the battle, all gnoll | * |   |
|           | attacks against the target gain an attack bonus   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | equal to the escalation die.                      | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Pack ferocity:* If more than one gnoll is        | P | 5 |
|           | engaged with the target, each gnoll melee attack  | D | 6 |
|           | that misses that target deals half damage.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gnoll Fiendfletch

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 7th     | **Infernal mace +12 vs. AC**---18 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The fiendfletch can make a         | * | 9 |
| Archer    | disengage check as a free action this turn after  | * |   |
|           | the attack.                                       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           | **R: Hellbent bow +13 vs. AC**---30 damage        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is dazed until the end  | D | 5 |
|           | of its next turn as it suffers debilitating pain  | * |   |
|           | from a hellish arrow.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Close-quarters archery:* While making a ranged   | * |   |
|           | attack, the fiendfletch gains a +4 bonus to AC    | * |   |
|           | against opportunity attacks.                      | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Duck and cover:* While the fiendfletch has at    |   |   |
|           | least one blocker, troop, or wrecker ally (like a | * |   |
|           | shredder) between it and an enemy, it gains a +4  | * |   |
|           | bonus to all defenses against ranged and          | H |   |
|           | close-quarters attacks from that enemy.           | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Living arrows:* When the fiendfletch rolls a     | * |   |
|           | natural 16+ with a *hellbent bow* attack and      |   |   |
|           | hits, the target is weakened (save ends) instead  |   |   |
|           | of dazed.                                         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gnoll Shredder

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 7th     | **Diabolical axe +12 vs. AC**---25 damage, and    | A |   |
| level     | one of the shredder's allies engaged with the     | C | 1 |
|           | target can pop free                               | * | 9 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Battle lock:* Gnoll shredders gain a +2 bonus to |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | opportunity attacks, and enemies take a --8       | * | 5 |
|           | penalty to disengage checks against them.         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Legion fighting:* When the escalation die        | D | 5 |
|           | increases, if there are more gnolls in the battle | * |   |
|           | than their enemies, one gnoll shredder in the     | * |   |
|           | battle can make a melee attack as a free action.  |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Spoiling strike:* When the shredder hits with an | D |   |
|           | opportunity attack, it can make a *spoiling       | * |   |
|           | strike* attack against that enemy as a free       | * |   |
|           | action.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Spoiling strike +17 vs. PD (one enemy it hits   | * |   |
|           | with an opportunity attack)**---The target loses  | H |   |
|           | the rest of its actions that turn (and stops      | P |   |
|           | moving if it was moving).                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Vicious in-fighting:* When an enemy would pop    |   |   |
|           | free from the shredder, it must roll a disengage  |   |   |
|           | check as a free action instead. If it fails, the  |   |   |
|           | shredder can make a *diabolical axe* attack       |   |   |
|           | against that enemy as a free action.              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Goblin

#### Goblin Grunt

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Club +6 vs. AC**---6 damage if the goblins and  | A |   |
| level     | their allies outnumber their enemies; 4 damage if | C | 1 |
|           | they don't.                                       | * | 3 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Shortbow +6 vs. AC**---4 damage              |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Shifty bugger:* Goblins gain a +5 bonus to       | * |   |
|           | disengage checks.                                 | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Goblin Scum

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Club +6 vs. AC**---4 damage                     | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Shortbow +6 vs. AC**---3 damage              | * | 4 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shifty bugger:* Goblins gain a +5 bonus to       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | disengage checks.                                 | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bugbear Scout

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Flanged mace +7 vs. AC**---10 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Throwing axe +7 vs. AC**---8 damage          | * | 6 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           | **C: Stealthy maneuver +7 vs. MD (the nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemy with the highest MD)**---The next attack    | P | 8 |
|           | the bugbear scout makes against the target this   | D | 8 |
|           | turn deals +1d12 extra damage.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action when    |   |   |
|           | the bugbear scout starts its turn unengaged.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Unpredictable:* The bugbear scout gains a +5     | * |   |
|           | bonus to disengage checks, and when it            | * |   |
|           | successfully disengages, one of the enemies       |   |   |
|           | engaged with it takes 1d6 damage.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Goblin Shaman

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Pointy spear +6 vs. AC**---5 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Shaking curse +6 vs. PD**---8 damage, and    | * | 2 |
| Caster    | until the end of the shaman's next turn, the      | * |   |
|           | target takes 2 damage whenever an enemy engages   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | it or disengages from it                          | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Choose another nearby | P | 3 |
|           | enemy; it also suffers from the engage/disengage  | D | 4 |
|           | effect until the end of the shaman's next turn.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shifty bugger:* Goblins gain a +5 bonus to       |   |   |
|           | disengage checks.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hobgoblin Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 2nd     | **Longsword +7 vs. AC**---8 damage                | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 2 damage.                    | * | 4 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two hobgoblins in the  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | battle (round up, ignore mooks), one of them can  | * | 4 |
|           | use *well-armored* as a free action once during   | * |   |
|           | the battle.                                       | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | *Well-armored (group):* Ignore all damage from a  | * |   |
|           | hit (but not a crit) against AC.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bugbear

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Oversized weapon +8 vs. AC**---10 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The attack deals +5 damage.   | * | 7 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* If the target is engaged with two or more |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | foes, it takes 1d8 damage.                        | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bugbear Schemer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Big-ass warclub +9 vs. AC**---8 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Each of the bugbear   | * | 4 |
| Leader    | schemer's nearby humanoid allies gains a +2 bonus | * |   |
|           | to melee attacks until the start of the schemer's |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | next turn.                                        | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* 4 damage.                     | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | **R: Ridiculously heavy crossbow +7 vs. AC (one   | * |   |
|           | nearby or faraway enemy)**---14 damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 1d6 extra    | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Rebuke to fools +9 vs. | * |   |
|           | MD (one nearby enemy)**---2d6 psychic damage      |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/round as an interrupt action,    | * |   |
|           | when a nearby enemy rolls a natural 1--5 with an  | H |   |
|           | attack against it.                                | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Combat reload:* During the bugbear schemer's     | * |   |
|           | turn, if it doesn't engage an enemy or move, it   |   |   |
|           | regains a use of *ridiculously heavy crossbow* if |   |   |
|           | it's expended as it reloads the crossbow.         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Fighting withdrawal:* When the bugbear schemer   |   |   |
|           | successfully disengages, one of the enemies       |   |   |
|           | engaged with it takes 1d6 damage.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flee is a four-letter word:* When the bugbear    |   |   |
|           | schemer thinks the battle is out of reach and it  |   |   |
|           | isn't engaged, it can try to flee once per        |   |   |
|           | battle. As a move action, roll a hard save. On a  |   |   |
|           | success, the bugbear schemer had a bolt-hole or   |   |   |
|           | escape plan ready and it gets away (though it's   |   |   |
|           | probably just getting more troops).               |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Barbarous Bugbear

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12 (see *ferocious start*)           | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Warclub +9 vs. AC**---11 damage                 | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Each enemy engaged    | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | with the barbarous bugbear takes 1d8 damage.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Throwing axe +8 vs. AC**---10 damage         | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                          | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 1 |
|           | *Ferocious start:* Until the barbarous bugbear is | * |   |
|           | staggered or the escalation die is 2+, it acts    | * |   |
|           | twice per round. Roll initiative once at +12. It  |   |   |
|           | takes its second turn when the initiative count   | * |   |
|           | is seven less (minimum 1).                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hobgoblin Captain

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Longsword +10 vs. AC**---14 damage, and         | A |   |
| level     | *willing-underling* triggers                      | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Leader    | *Willing-underling:* Until the start of its next  | * |   |
|           | turn, the first time an attack would hit the      |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | hobgoblin captain, it can partially avoid that    | * | 4 |
|           | attack if it has a nearby goblin ally. It only    | * |   |
|           | takes half damage from the attack, and that ally  | P | 5 |
|           | takes the rest.                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Throwing axe +8 vs. AC**---10 damage         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two hobgoblins in the  | * |   |
|           | battle (round up, ignore mooks), one of them can  | * |   |
|           | use *well-armored* as a free action once during   | M |   |
|           | the battle.                                       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Well-armored (group):* Ignore all damage from a  | * |   |
|           | hit (but not a crit) against AC.                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hobgoblin Warmage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Warstaff +8 vs. AC**---15 damage                | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Fireblast +10 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby enemies | * | 4 |
| Caster    | in a group)**---10 fire damage (or 20 if used     | * |   |
|           | against a single target), and the target loses    |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | its next move action                              | * | 9 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Concussive blast +10 vs. PD (all enemies     | P | 7 |
|           | engaged with the warmage)**---10 force damage,    | D | 0 |
|           | and the warmage pops the target off of it         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 20:* The target is also dazed (save      |   |   |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Golem

#### Flesh Golem

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +5                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Sweeping fists +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Blocker  | **Maddened battlefield repairs +11 vs. AC (one   | * |   |
|          | staggered living enemy)**---20 damage, and the   |   | 1 |
| C        | flesh golem heals 2d10 hit points                | * | 4 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage, and the flesh golem heals     | P | 1 |
|          | 1d10 hit points.                                 | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Limited use:* The flesh golem can only use this | * |   |
|          | attack while it's staggered.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Energy magnet:* Whenever a spell that causes    | * |   |
|          | cold, fire, force, lightning, or negative energy | M |   |
|          | damage targets one of the flesh golem's nearby   | D |   |
|          | allies, the flesh golem has a 50% chance of      | * |   |
|          | becoming the main target instead. Therefore,     | * |   |
|          | spells that affect groups would spread out from  |   |   |
|          | the flesh golem.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Weakness of the flesh:* Unlike other golems,    | H |   |
|          | flesh golems are not immune to effects.          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Clay Golem

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Bare brutal hands +10 vs. AC**---36 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Cursed wound:* A non-dwarf creature damaged by  | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | a clay golem can't be healed to above half its   | * |   |
|          | maximum hit points until after the battle.       |   | 1 |
| C        |                                                  | * | 4 |
| onstruct | *Golem immunity:* Non-organic golems are immune  | * |   |
|          | to effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,       | P | 1 |
|          | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing | D | 2 |
|          | damage. You can damage a golem, but that's about | * | 0 |
|          | it.                                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ignore attacks 11+:* When an attack hits this   | * |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 11+   | * |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it misses instead. That's  | M |   |
|          | *all* attacks.                                   | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bronze Golem

+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|           |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th     | **Gong-like fists of bronze +12 vs. AC (2        | A |   |
| level     | attacks)**---20 damage                           | C | 2 |
|           |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Blocker   | *Natural even hit against a target in heavy      | * |   |
|           | armor:* The target is dazed (save ends).         |   | 1 |
| Construct |                                                  | * | 7 |
|           | *Natural odd hit against a target in light armor | * |   |
|           | or no armor:* The target takes 10 extra damage.  | P | 1 |
|           |                                                  | D | 9 |
|           | *Miss:* 4d6 damage.                              | * | 0 |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           | *Golem immunity:* Non-organic golems are immune  |   |   |
|           | to effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,       | * |   |
|           | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing | * |   |
|           | damage. You can damage a golem, but that's about | M |   |
|           | it.                                              | D |   |
|           |                                                  | * |   |
|           | *Hidden flaw:* An enemy who hits the bronze      | * |   |
|           | golem with a natural 18+ attack roll can roll a  |   |   |
|           | DC 25 skill check using Intelligence or Wisdom   | * |   |
|           | to notice the bronze golem's hidden flaw! On a   | * |   |
|           | success, until the end of the battle, the golem  | H |   |
|           | loses its damage resistance and becomes          | P |   |
|           | vulnerable to all attacks (against each enemy    | * |   |
|           | informed of the flaw).                           | * |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           | *Resist damage 18+:* When an attack targets this |   |   |
|           | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 18+   |   |   |
|           | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           | *Percussion resonance:* When the escalation die  |   |   |
|           | reaches 3+, the bronze golem gains a bonus to    |   |   |
|           | its first *gong-like fists of bronze* attack     |   |   |
|           | roll each turn equal to the number of attacks    |   |   |
|           | made against it so far that turn. (Each turn is  |   |   |
|           | separate, not cumulative.)                       |   |   |
|           |                                                  |   |   |
|           | *Spiky:* When an enemy engaged with the bronze   |   |   |
|           | golem misses it with a melee attack, that enemy  |   |   |
|           | takes 2d12 damage.                               |   |   |
+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                  |   |   |
+-----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Stone Golem

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Massive stone fists +12 vs. AC (2              | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---35 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Blocker  | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| C        | **Finishing smash +14 vs. AC (one staggered      | * | 8 |
| onstruct | enemy)**---80 damage, and the golem pops the     | * |   |
|          | target off it and moves it a short distance away | P | 2 |
|          | from the golem                                   | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* 20 damage, and the   | * |   |
|          | target is hampered (save ends).                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* 20 damage, and the    | * |   |
|          | target is dazed (save ends).                     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Golem immunity:* Non-organic golems are immune  | * |   |
|          | to effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,       | * |   |
|          | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing |   |   |
|          | damage. You can damage a golem, but that's about | * |   |
|          | it.                                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Former idol:* Evoke the powers of an ancient    | * |   |
|          | culture's strange rites by giving the stone      |   |   |
|          | golem any weird power you wish. If you're stuck  |   |   |
|          | for inspiration, consider starting with random   |   |   |
|          | abilities from the demons that aren't related to |   |   |
|          | energy or the *cone of cold* from the ogre mage. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Marble Golem

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Enormous maul +15 vs. AC**---60 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The golem can make a | * | 0 |
| Troop    | *backswing* attack as a free action.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| C        | *\[Special trigger\]* **Backswing +14 vs.        | * | 2 |
| onstruct | PD**---40 damage                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Golem immunity:* Non-organic golems are immune  | D | 4 |
|          | to effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,       | * | 0 |
|          | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing | * |   |
|          | damage. You can damage a golem, but that's about |   |   |
|          | it.                                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Special Virtues]{.underline}                    | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | Each marble golem is infused with *two*          | * |   |
|          | virtues---magical properties that relate to the  | * |   |
|          | emotion or feeling incorporated into the         |   |   |
|          | sculpture as its dominant theme. Choose two      | * |   |
|          | virtues from the list below, or for a unique     | * |   |
|          | marble golem, invent your own.                   | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Awe (fear effect):* While nearby the golem,     | * |   |
|          | enemies with 40 hp or fewer are dazed (--4       | * |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     |   |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Beauty:* The first time each enemy attacks the  |   |   |
|          | marble golem this battle, it must roll a normal  |   |   |
|          | save; on a failure, the attack takes a --6       |   |   |
|          | penalty.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Courage:* While staggered, the marble golem     |   |   |
|          | adds the escalation die to its attack rolls.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Endurance:* When the marble golem rolls a       |   |   |
|          | natural 1--5 with an attack roll, it heals 1d10  |   |   |
|          | hit points per point on the escalation die. (It  |   |   |
|          | was checking for damage and got distracted.)     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Hatred:* When an enemy is staggered by the      |   |   |
|          | marble golem's attack, that enemy takes 4d10     |   |   |
|          | extra damage.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Patience:* Each turn, the marble golem can use  |   |   |
|          | one standard action to gain a +2 bonus to all    |   |   |
|          | defenses until the start of its next turn. If it |   |   |
|          | does, it gains an extra standard action during   |   |   |
|          | its next turn.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Protection:* When the marble golem rolls a      |   |   |
|          | natural 16+ with an attack, decrease the         |   |   |
|          | escalation die by 1.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Strength:* The marble golem's melee attacks now |   |   |
|          | deal half damage on a miss.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *More virtues:* Statues that capture even more   |   |   |
|          | themes make stronger marble golems. Add one or   |   |   |
|          | two more virtues to the golem.                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Iron Golem

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 10th   | **Fists of iron +17 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---50    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  | *Miss:* 5d10 damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| C        | *Golem immunity:* Non-organic golems are immune  | * | 0 |
| onstruct | to effects. They can't be dazed, weakened,       | * |   |
|          | confused, made vulnerable, or touched by ongoing | P | 3 |
|          | damage. You can damage a golem, but that's about | D | 6 |
|          | it.                                              | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Rampage:* At the start of each of the iron      |   |   |
|          | golem's turns, roll a d6. If the roll is equal   | * |   |
|          | to or less than the escalation die, the iron     | * |   |
|          | golem goes on a rampage that turn. Instead of    | M |   |
|          | its two normal *fists of iron* attacks, it can   | D |   |
|          | make three attacks with *fists of iron*, each    | * |   |
|          | against a different random nearby creature,      | * |   |
|          | enemy or ally. It can move after each such       |   |   |
|          | attack as a free action, if necessary, taking    | * |   |
|          | only half damage from opportunity attacks during | * |   |
|          | the rampage.                                     | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Poison gas:* The first time the iron golem is   |   |   |
|          | staggered, poison gas leaks from it into the     |   |   |
|          | area. It can make a *poison gas cloud* attack as |   |   |
|          | a free action.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Poison gas cloud +15  |   |   |
|          | vs. PD (all nearby creatures)**---25 ongoing     |   |   |
|          | poison damage                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hag

Hags get two of the following abilities, and a single death curse.

[Hag Abilities: Choose TWO]{.underline}

**Adept Illusionist:** The hag gains a +5 bonus to initiative checks due
to being not quite where she seems.

*Hag ability:* As a distraction, the hag creates an illusion of her
doing one thing, when she is in fact setting a trap. The hag throws out
a bear-trap or other impediment and one nearby enemy becomes stuck (save
ends). While stuck this way, the target takes 6 damage at the start of
each of its turns.

**Another skin:** On the hag's first round of combat each battle, she
gains a +2 attack bonus due to her victims being shocked as she bursts
out of her false outer skin.

*Hag ability:* The hag coughs up a glob of liquid pseudo-flesh that
globs onto a nearby enemy (no attack roll). The glob solidifies causing
an effect of the hag's choice: the target is stuck (save ends); OR the
target is unable to cast spells during its next turn (the pseudo-flesh
covers their mouth and face).

**Blood pact:** Each creature allied to the hag through a pact gains a
+2 bonus with their first attack each battle if the hag is present.

*Hag ability:* The hag spits blood in the face of the target and makes a
command. The target must roll an immediate save; on a failure, as a free
action it makes basic attack against an ally or against itself (target's
choice).

**Breath stealing:** The hag starts combat with 10 temporary hit points.

*Hag ability:* The hag steals a recovery from the target and heals 20
hp.

**Death shriek:** When a melee attack hits the hag, she lets out a
shriek as a free action and the attacker takes 2d4 thunder damage.

*Hag ability:* The hag begins to shriek, and each enemy in the battle
takes a --4 attack penalty with spells until the start of her next turn.

**Dusk walk:** Once per day the hag can implant a suggestion in the mind
of a target sleeping within a day's travel of her. The hag rolls an
attack: **+10 vs. MD**; on a hit, she implants a suggestion in the
target that they must obey when a condition she chooses is met.
Suggested actions can't cause direct harm (the target can't be forced to
fight another or harm themselves), can be no longer than 12 words, and
affects the target for a week or until triggered. GM keeps the roll
hidden.

*Hag ability:* The hag becomes immaterial, pops free from all enemies
engaged with her, and enters the land of dreams, re-appearing next to
any nearby conscious creature (or a nearby or faraway creature that is
unconscious). The hag then makes the following attack: **C: +10 vs. MD
(each nearby unconscious enemy)**---The hag implants a suggestion in the
target that they must obey when they become conscious (usually "When you
awake, flee this fight and discard your equipment.") Suggested actions
can't cause direct harm. The round after the target acts on the
implanted suggestion it can start rolling normal saves to throw off the
effect.

**Fateful visions:** The hag uses a +2 magical weapon traded to her for
her services (she gains a +2 bonus to attack and damage with melee
attacks).

*Hag ability:* The hag has seen this fight in a vision. Her crit range
expands by 2 until the end of the battle. Each increase is cumulative.

**Foul-touched:** When an enemy is battling the hag, at the start of
each of its turns, it takes 2d6 psychic damage from the horror of the
hag's visage unless it takes precautions to avoid directly glancing at
her terrible face (mirror, blindfold, etc., which might cause attack
penalties).

*Hag ability:* The hag chooses a nearby enemy and glares at it. That
target must roll an immediate save; on a failure, the target is stricken
blind by her ugliness. While blinded this way, the target is hampered,
weakened, and can't make ranged attacks. The target can end the effect
by splashing liquid into their eyes or using a similar act to clear the
ugly out as a standard action.

**Song of dreams:** Enemies take a --4 penalty to their initiative rolls
in battles with the hag.

*Hag ability:* The hag begins to sing and the two enemies closest to her
(even if faraway) must roll an immediate save; on a failure, the target
is dazed (save ends). If the dazed target fails its first save, instead
it's weakened (save ends). If the weakened target fails its second save,
instead it's helpless (save ends).

**Thief of mist:** The hag ignores opportunity attacks and can't be
intercepted while moving.

*Hag ability:* The hag becomes a mist until the start of her next turn.
While a mist, only spells cast with a +3 implement and attacks using a
+3 magical weapon can harm her. (Some special story item might also
allow attacks to hit if no PC has a +3 item.)

**Twist the path:** Once per day the hag can enspell an area to attract
visitors, causing those traveling nearby to get lost and wander to that
location. Alternately, the hag can cause the location to repel visitors.
Finding the correct path to that location requires a DC 20 check if it
is a familiar place, a DC 25 check if the travelers only have a map or
guide, or a DC 30 check if the travelers are unfamiliar with the area.

*Hag ability:* The target is also confused (easy save ends, 6+).

**Weakening touch:** Each enemy fighting the hag must roll a normal save
at the start of the battle; on a failure, that creature starts the
battle weakened (easy save ends, 6+).

*Hag ability:* The target is dazed (save ends). If the dazed target
fails its first save, instead it's weakened (save ends). When the target
saves against this effect, it takes a --2 attack penalty until the end
of its next turn.

**Winter breath:** The hag's attacks deal cold damage.

*Hag ability:* The target takes 6 ongoing cold damage.

[Death Curses: Create ONE]{.underline}

When a hag dies she curses the one who killed her. The only known way to
remove the curse is to seek the aid of another hag, though there may be
some ways to end such a curse that are not readily known.

Create one curse per hag. A good curse makes life horribly weird for a
character, but isn't something that debilitates them. Avoid ones that
blind, deafen, cripple, or mute characters. Odd habits, ugly features,
unusual smells, strange and disgusting diets---all these are good. They
should make the character and the story more interesting.

#### Hag

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Iron claws +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---9 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 14+:* The hag triggers one *hag         | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | ability* as a free action.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Natural 18+:* The hag triggers two *hag         | * | 5 |
|          | abilities* as a free action (can't be the same   | * |   |
|          | ability twice).                                  | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | **R: Evil eye +10 vs. MD**---Ongoing 12 damage   | * | 8 |
|          | (hard save ends, 16+)                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The attack roll also targets a    | * |   |
|          | second different enemy of the hag's choice (but  | * |   |
|          | not a third with another 16+).                   | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* As above, and the attack roll     | * |   |
|          | also targets a third different enemy of the      | * |   |
|          | hag's choice (but not a fourth with another      |   |   |
|          | 18+).                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Death curse:* Each hag can lay a curse upon the | H |   |
|          | one who ends its horrible life. After dropping   | P |   |
|          | to 0 hit points, a hag always lingers long       | * |   |
|          | enough to pronounce the words of the curse. (See | * |   |
|          | Death Curses.)                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Delusionist:* All hags have the ability to      |   |   |
|          | twist the perceptions of others. If the hag has  |   |   |
|          | a short time to prepare, it can hide a small     |   |   |
|          | hut, disguise a volunteer or captive as a        |   |   |
|          | monster, disguise itself as a harmless peasant   |   |   |
|          | woman, etc. A DC 30 skill check is required to   |   |   |
|          | overcome the delusion and see the truth of it    |   |   |
|          | (if a player gives a reason for not trusting     |   |   |
|          | what their character sees; perhaps add subtle    |   |   |
|          | clues toward that end). The magic fades as soon  |   |   |
|          | as the hag enters combat.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature,        |   |   |
|          | enemies with 30 hp or fewer are dazed (--4       |   |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     |   |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Half-Orc

[Nastier Special for all half-orcs]{.underline}

*Lethal swing:* Once per battle, a half-orc can reroll a melee attack
and use the result it prefers.

#### Half-Orc Legionnaire

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Longsword +10 vs. AC**---12 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The half-orc legionnaire      | * | 8 |
| Troop     | gains a +2 bonus to all defenses until the start  | * |   |
|           | of its next turn.                                 |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes +1d6 damage.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 4 damage.                    | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* If the legionnaire's next     | * |   |
|           | melee attack is a natural even hit, it becomes a  |   |   |
|           | critical hit instead!                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Javelin +10 vs. AC**---10 damage             | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Half-Orc Tribal Champion

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Great axe +9 vs. AC**---18 damage               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* The tribal champion heals 5   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | hp.                                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even miss:* 10 damage.                   | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Longbow +8 vs. AC**---12 damage              | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Tribal rage:* When the escalation die is even, a | * |   |
|           | tribal champion can roll two d20 for each melee   | * |   |
|           | attack roll it makes and use the result it        |   |   |
|           | prefers. If both dice are 11+, the melee attack   | * |   |
|           | is a critical hit.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Half-Orc Commander

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Jagged longsword +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Leader   | *Natural even hit:* One nearby lower-level mook  | * |   |
|          | makes an attack as a free action.                |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | **R: Thrown javelin +13 vs. AC**---20 damage     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The half-orc commander gains | D | 5 |
|          | 20 temporary hit points.                         | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Orcish command:* When a nearby ally of the      |   |   |
|          | half-orc commander scores a critical hit, that   | * |   |
|          | ally can roll a save against a save ends effect  | * |   |
|          | as a free action.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hallowed Gargoyle

[Nastier Specials for all Hallowed Gargoyles]{.underline}

These nastier specials also apply to temple lions.

*Mirrored aggression:* Hallowed gargoyles have some ability to sense
intentions and a larger capacity to react appropriately! PCs with a
negative or conflicted relationship with the Religious Icon are
vulnerable to all the hallowed gargoyles' attacks.

*Statues, statues, everywhere:* Because they look so much like statues,
and because most of the things that look like hallowed gargoyles are
statues, hallowed gargoyles are capable of springing a surprise on
inattentive PCs. When there's a chance of such an ambush, give the PCs a
normal skill check (DC 20 at champion-tier, DC 25 at epic tier) to
notice the gargoyles waking and avoid being surprised (13th Age core
rulebook, page 164).

#### Beautific Gargoyle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | **Claws +9 vs. AC (two attacks)**---6 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 2 damage.                                 | * | 8 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Drop like a stone +13 vs. AC**---18 damage      |   | 1 |
| Construct |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* Target is weakened and         | * |   |
|           | hampered until the end of its next turn.          | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Limited use:* Only when the beautific gargoyle   | * |   |
|           | starts its turn flying and ends its turn engaged  | * |   |
|           | on the ground.                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Beautific gargoyles can fly, but not    | * |   |
|           | gracefully. Mid-air, they take a -2 penalty to    | M |   |
|           | all their defenses, and it takes them two move    | D |   |
|           | actions to get airborne unless they can launch    | * |   |
|           | from above.                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Rocky hide:* The beautific gargoyle has *resist  | * |   |
|           | damage 12+* against attacks targeting AC.         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hallowed Gargoyle

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 6th    | **Claws +11 vs. AC (two attacks)**---9 damage    | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 3 damage.                                | * | 0 |
| Leader   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Drop like a stone +13 vs. AC**---26 damage     |   | 1 |
| C        |                                                  | * | 9 |
| onstruct | *Natural 16+ hit:* Target is weakened and        | * |   |
|          | hampered until the end of its next turn.         | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Limited use:* Only when the hallowed gargoyle   | * | 0 |
|          | starts its turn flying and ends its turn engaged | * |   |
|          | on the ground.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Each hallowed gargoyle has **one** of the        | * |   |
|          | following attacks. Choose, or roll a d3; 1:      | M |   |
|          | bizarrely beautiful chant; 2: magic missiles; 3: | D |   |
|          | denunciation.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Bizarrely beautiful chant +11 vs. MD (1d3   |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---20 psychic damage            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* One nearby ally can roll a   | H |   |
|          | save against a save ends effect. If no allies    | P |   |
|          | are affected by a save ends effect, one nearby   | * |   |
|          | ally can make a basic attack as a free action.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Magic missiles (1d4 nearby enemies)**---14  |   |   |
|          | force damage                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Denunciation +11 vs. MD (1 enemy that has   |   |   |
|          | attacked the hallowed gargoyle this              |   |   |
|          | battle)**---30 psychic damage                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save |   |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Hallowed gargoyles can fly, but not    |   |   |
|          | gracefully. Mid-air, they take a -2 penalty to   |   |   |
|          | all their defenses, and it takes them two move   |   |   |
|          | actions to get airborne unless they can launch   |   |   |
|          | from above.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Halo:* The first time the hallowed gargoyle is  |   |   |
|          | hit by an attack against MD, reroll the attack   |   |   |
|          | with a -2 attack penalty. (Sometimes the halo    |   |   |
|          | sputters, so if you forget to use it the first   |   |   |
|          | time, use the reroll later in the battle.)       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Rocky hide:* The gargoyle has resist damage 12+ |   |   |
|          | against attacks targeting AC.                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Temple Lion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 7th    | **Stone claws +12 vs. AC (two attacks)**---25    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit or miss:* The temple lion can  | * |   |
|          | make another *stone claws* attack against a      |   | 1 |
| C        | different engaged enemy.                         | * | 8 |
| onstruct |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Each temple lion has **one** of the following    | P | 1 |
|          | attacks. Choose, or roll a d3; 1: great roar; 2: | D | 8 |
|          | magic missiles; 3: rumbling omens.               | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Great roar +12 vs. PD (1d4 nearby           |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---50 thunder damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is weakened until the | M |   |
|          | end of its next turn.                            | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Magic missiles (1d4 nearby enemies)**---36  | H |   |
|          | force damage                                     | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Rumbling omens (1d3 nearby enemies) +12 vs. |   |   |
|          | MD**---15 ongoing thunder damage, and while      |   |   |
|          | target is taking ongoing thunder damage, the     |   |   |
|          | temple lion can reroll a missed attack against   |   |   |
|          | the target once per turn                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Quick use:* This spell only requires a quick    |   |   |
|          | action to use.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Haloed mane:* The first time the hallowed       |   |   |
|          | gargoyle is hit by an attack against MD, reroll  |   |   |
|          | the attack with a -2 attack penalty. (Sometimes  |   |   |
|          | the halo sputters, so if you forget to use it    |   |   |
|          | the first time, use the reroll later in the      |   |   |
|          | battle.)                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Rocky hide:* The temple lion has resist damage  |   |   |
|          | 12+ against attacks targeting AC.                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Harpy

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Talons +6 vs. AC**---10 damage                  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Cull:* The harpy gains a +5 bonus to attack and  | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | damage with this attack against any enemy         | * |   |
|           | suffering from any *fiendish song* effect.        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | **C: Fiendish song +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby         | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---5 psychic damage                     | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Natural 16--17:* The target is hampered (easy    | * |   |
|           | save ends, 6+).                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 18--19:* The target is weakened instead  | * |   |
|           | of hampered (easy save ends, 6+).                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Natural 20:* The target is confused instead of   | D |   |
|           | weakened (easy save ends, 6+).                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Haunted Skull

#### Watch Skull

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **C: Screech +8 vs. MD (1d3 random nearby         | A |   |
| level     | creatures)**---4 psychic damage                   | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| Troop     | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck (save ends).   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Natural roll is equal to or lower than the       | * | 6 |
|           | escalation die:* 1d3 nearby enemies hear the      | * |   |
|           | alarm and join the battle. The creatures          | P | 2 |
|           | attracted by the constant screeching are          | D | 0 |
|           | (usually) level 1 mooks of a type that would be   | * |   |
|           | appropriate for the skull's location.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Immobile:* The skull can't hop, jump, roll, or   | * |   |
|           | fly. It can't even move its jaw.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | D |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Allies:* Creatures that have been mystically     | * |   |
|           | "keyed" to the skull aren't affected by its       | H |   |
|           | *screech* attack.                                 | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Gem eyes:* The skull can sense the unseen and    | * |   |
|           | things from beyond the world. A wizard using a    |   |   |
|           | *blur* spell, a rogue shadow walking, and other   |   |   |
|           | similar abilities offer no protection from the    |   |   |
|           | skull and its *screech* attack. (If the PCs come  |   |   |
|           | up with a plausible tactic to bypass the skull,   |   |   |
|           | give the skull a normal save to detect them.)     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Move-triggered:* When an enemy near the skull    |   |   |
|           | uses a move action to move, the skull can make a  |   |   |
|           | *screech* attack against that creature as a free  |   |   |
|           | action that interrupts the move. The skull can    |   |   |
|           | use this ability twice per round. Shadow walking, |   |   |
|           | teleporting, and other non-standard modes of      |   |   |
|           | movement will trigger the *screech* attack.       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Slime-Skull

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Slam +10 vs. AC**---7 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Grasping slime tendrils +10 vs. PD (one      | * | 0 |
| Spoiler   | nearby enemy)**---7 acid damage                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 3 extra acid      | * | 8 |
|           | damage and is stuck (hard save ends, 16+).        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Acidic:* When a creature is engaged with the     | D | 6 |
|           | slime-skull or stuck from its *grasping slime     | * |   |
|           | tendrils* attack at the start of its turn, it     | * |   |
|           | takes 3 acid damage.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Slimy blastback:* When an enemy engaged with the | * |   |
|           | slime-skull hits it with a melee attack, the      | M |   |
|           | slime-skull fires a blast of acidic slime back at | D |   |
|           | that creature, which takes 1d4 acid damage.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Slow:* This creature is slow. It only moves when |   |   |
|           | the escalation die is odd or 6+.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A slime-skull can climb on        | H |   |
|           | ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the   | P |   |
|           | ground.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Breeder:* If the slime-skull kills a creature,   |   |   |
|           | it takes that creature's head as a standard       |   |   |
|           | action and attempts to escape (it can squeeze     |   |   |
|           | through gaps as small as the skull). The slain    |   |   |
|           | creature can't be resurrected until its skull is  |   |   |
|           | recovered because its spirit is now trapped       |   |   |
|           | within the skull. If the PCs don't track down the |   |   |
|           | slime-skull before their next full heal-up (or    |   |   |
|           | within a day), the stolen skull will transform    |   |   |
|           | into another slime-skull. Attempts to resurrect   |   |   |
|           | the creature become much more difficult, perhaps  |   |   |
|           | even impossible, at that point.                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Jest Bones

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **C: Puns +11 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies)**---5   | A |   |
| level     | psychic damage, plus 1d6 ongoing psychic damage   | C | 1 |
|           | if the GM makes a horrible pun while rolling the  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler   | attacks                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Bad puns:* Creatures that can't hear or that     | * | 9 |
|           | have attempted to reduce their hearing are only   | * |   |
|           | affected by a jest bones' *puns* attack if the    | P | 4 |
|           | natural roll is odd.                              | D | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited flight:* The haunted skull can glide and | * |   |
|           | hover, always within seven or eight feet of the   |   |   |
|           | ground. It also performs barrel rolls.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | M |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Screaming Skull

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **C: Treacherous scream +11 vs. MD (up to 2       | A |   |
| level     | nearby or faraway enemies)**---6 psychic damage,  | C | 1 |
|           | and the target takes 2d6 psychic damage the first | * | 1 |
| Troop     | time it succeeds at a save before the end of its  | * |   |
|           | next turn.                                        |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 9 |
|           | *Limited flight:* The haunted skull can glide and | * |   |
|           | hover, always within seven or eight feet of the   | P | 4 |
|           | ground.                                           | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Flaming Skull

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | Vulnerability: holy OR negative energy, depending | A |   |
| level     | on the skull                                      | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| Caster    | **R: Burning gaze +12 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies  | * |   |
|           | or one faraway enemy)**---10 fire damage          |   | 2 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *First natural even hit each battle:* The target  | * |   |
|           | is confused (easy save ends, 6+).                 | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | **C: Smoldering flames +11 vs. PD (one nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---14 fire damage, and each time the      | * |   |
|           | target fails a save this battle, it bursts into   |   |   |
|           | flames and takes 5 ongoing fire damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited flight:* The haunted skull can glide and | M |   |
|           | hover, always within seven or eight feet of the   | D |   |
|           | ground.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      |   |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     | H |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | P |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Black Skull

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **R: Telekinetic grasp +15 vs. PD (1d3 nearby    | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---28 force damage                     | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit:* The target is stuck (save    | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   | 2 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | *Telekinetic crush:* When the escalation die is  | * |   |
|          | even, one enemy of the skull's choice that is    | P | 1 |
|          | stuck from its *telekinetic grasp* takes 18      | D | 1 |
|          | force damage at the start of the skull's turn.   | * | 0 |
|          | When the escalation die is odd, one such stuck   | * |   |
|          | enemy of its choice is hampered (save ends).     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited flight:* The haunted skull glides and   | * |   |
|          | hovers, always within seven or eight feet of the | M |   |
|          | ground. If the skull is incognito, its empty     | D |   |
|          | clothing moves around beneath it, held in the    | * |   |
|          | shape of a person by telekinesis and it stays    | * |   |
|          | closer to the ground to appear normal.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make     | * |   |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Skull of the Beast

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 9th    | **Huge club +17 vs. AC**---50 damage             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 18 thunder damage to 1d3 nearby enemies  | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | (the beast screams and bellows in                | * |   |
|          | disappointment).                                 |   | 2 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | **C: Baleful gaze +15 vs. PD (1d3 nearby         | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---25 negative energy damage           | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target is stuck (save     | * | 0 |
|          | ends) from looking into the void within it.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature,        | M |   |
|          | enemies that have 60 hp or fewer are dazed (--4  | D |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     | * |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hellbugs

#### Boombug

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | **Gnawing teeth +6 vs. AC**---5 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 2 damage.                                 | * | 5 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Puff go boom:* When an enemy's attack hits the   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | boombug and leaves it staggered with an odd       | * | 1 |
|           | number of hit points, it explodes and dies. (Even | * |   |
|           | hit points does nothing.) When it explodes, each  | P | 3 |
|           | nearby creature not engaged with it takes 1d4     | D | 6 |
|           | thunder damage, and it makes the following attack | * |   |
|           | against each creature engaged with it.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Thunderous explosion +9 vs. PD**---12        | * |   |
|           | thunder damage                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 thunder damage.                         | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Latches on:* When the boombug hits with *gnawing | * |   |
|           | teeth*, the target takes a --5 penalty to         | * |   |
|           | disengage checks until it's no longer engaged     | H |   |
|           | with the boombug.                                 | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hellwasp

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Necrotizing stinger +6 vs. PD**---5 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 5 ongoing acid damage (easy   | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   | save ends, 6+), and the hellwasp can pop free     | * |   |
|           | from the target.                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Virulent injection:* When a creature fails a     | * |   |
|           | save against the hellwasp's ongoing acid damage,  | P | 2 |
|           | it gains a random condition until it saves        | D | 8 |
|           | against that damage. Have the player roll a d4 to | * |   |
|           | determine the condition: 1. confused; 2.          | * |   |
|           | weakened; 3. dazed; 4. vulnerable.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Hellwasps are adroit fliers that can    | * |   |
|           | hover and even fly backward.                      | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lethal injection:* The save versus the stinger's |   |   |
|           | ongoing acid damage is a normal save (11+)        | * |   |
|           | instead of an easy save.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hook Scuttler

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 2nd     | **Claws and mandibles +7 vs. AC**---8 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Spiky bits:* When a hook scuttler moves to       | * | 5 |
| Blocker   | engage an enemy it wasn't engaged with at the     | * |   |
|           | start of its turn, that enemy takes 1d6 damage.   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | When an enemy tries to disengage from the hook    | * | 4 |
|           | scuttler and fails, it takes 1d6 damage.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Corpse eater:* When a nearby enemy drops to 0    | * |   |
|           | hit points or below in the battle, the hook       |   |   |
|           | scuttler will ignore other enemies and move to    | * |   |
|           | attack that unconscious enemy until that enemy is | * |   |
|           | dead.                                             | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Swarming Maw

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Serrated maw +8 vs. AC**---6 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The swarming maw can teleport | * | 5 |
| Wrecker   | to engage a nearby enemy it can see that is       | * |   |
|           | already engaged by at least one other hellbug.    |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | *Miss:* The first time each battle the serrated   | * |   |
|           | maw misses, the target takes 1d4 damage for each  | P | 3 |
|           | hellbug engaged with it.                          | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Ongoing swarm:* The serrated maw also deals miss | * |   |
|           | damage the second time it misses with a *serrated | * |   |
|           | maw* attack each battle.                          | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hellcat (Bezekira)

#### Ember Imp

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Frantic claw +9 vs. AC**---8 damage, or 12     | A |   |
| level    | damage if the imp is not riding or next to a     | C | 1 |
|          | hellcat                                          | * | 6 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Flaming coal dust lugey +7 vs. PD**---7     |   | 1 |
| Devil    | fire damage                                      | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* 5 ongoing fire damage.        | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* The imp's *flaming coal dust lugey*      | * |   |
|          | attack gains a cumulative +1 damage bonus.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Burning skull:* The ember imp's skull           | * |   |
|          | constantly burns with flame, casting bright      | * |   |
|          | flickering light in the nearby area. In          | M |   |
|          | addition, any enemy that fumbles a melee attack  | D |   |
|          | against the imp takes 5 ongoing fire damage.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Devil's due (flame):* When you choose to add    |   |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against an ember | * |   |
|          | imp, the imp's *flaming coal dust lugey* attack  | * |   |
|          | gains a cumulative +1 damage bonus.              | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hellcat

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Claws and fangs +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15  | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Troop    | **Blazing pounce +12 vs. AC**---13 damage, and   | * |   |
|          | the hellcat pops free from the target and uses   |   | 1 |
| Devil    | its move action to engage a nearby enemy. It     | * | 9 |
|          | can't be intercepted during this movement. It    | * |   |
|          | then makes a second attack that also deals 10    | P | 1 |
|          | ongoing fire damage on a hit.                    | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Limited use:* The hellcat must have its move    | * |   |
|          | action available to use *blazing pounce*.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Fiery breath +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby         | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---15 fire damage                      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Devil's due (stalker):* When you choose to add  | * |   |
|          | the escalation die to an attack against a        | * |   |
|          | hellcat, during its next turn it gains a         |   |   |
|          | cumulative +2 bonus to attack if it's invisible. | * |   |
|          | Otherwise, it gains a non-cumulative +2 bonus to | * |   |
|          | all defenses until the start of its next turn as | H |   |
|          | its form blurs.                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fire fur:* When an enemy is engaged with the    | * |   |
|          | hellcat at the start of its turn, that enemy     |   |   |
|          | takes 5 fire damage.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Invisible:* While in bright light, the hellcat  |   |   |
|          | is invisible; attacks against it have a 50% miss |   |   |
|          | chance.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 13+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 13+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Corona aura:* Fire attacks that target an enemy |   |   |
|          | engaged with the hellcat gain:                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 5 extra fire     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fearless pursuer:* A hellcat takes only half    |   |   |
|          | damage from opportunity attacks.                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hellhound

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Savage bite +9 vs. AC**---7 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The hellhound can     | * | 6 |
| Wrecker   | make a *fiery breath* attack as a free action.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Fiery breath +9 vs. PD | * | 1 |
|           | (1d3 nearby enemies in a group)**---10 fire       | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | * |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Fiery aura:* Each creature engaged with a        | * |   |
|           | hellhound at the start of its turn takes 2d6 fire | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hellstone Gargoyle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +10                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 7th     | Vulnerability: thunder                            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Weathered claws +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---10   | * | 4 |
| Wrecker   | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Construct | *Metamorphic talons:* Whenever the hellstone      | * | 8 |
|           | gargoyle misses with a melee attack, *weathered   | * |   |
|           | claws* deals an additional 1d6 psychic damage     | P | 9 |
|           | until the end of the battle (maximum 4d6).        | D | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Foul waterspout +14 vs. PD (one nearby enemy | * |   |
|           | that is dazed, weakened, stunned, or has not      |   |   |
|           | acted yet this battle)**---15 damage and 25       | * |   |
|           | ongoing psychic damage                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Miss:* 15 psychic damage.                        | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Cloud of dust:* Whenever an engaged enemy misses | * |   |
|           | with an attack against AC or PD, the attacker is  | * |   |
|           | *vulnerable psychic* until the end of their next  | H |   |
|           | turn (fyi, that applies to *weathered claws*      | P |   |
|           | attacks that now have bonus psychic damage).      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Not-quite-flight:* The hellstone gargoyle can\'t |   |   |
|           | fly per se, but a clumsy glide can be achieved.   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Part of the scenery:* When there\'s the chance   |   |   |
|           | of an ambush, give the PC\'s a hard champion-tier |   |   |
|           | skill check (usually DC 25) to notice the         |   |   |
|           | gargoyle and avoid being surprised.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Grotesque visage:* The hellstone gargoyle has a  |   |   |
|           | fear aura: enemies engaged with the hellstone     |   |   |
|           | gargoyle who are below 36 hit points are dazed    |   |   |
|           | and can\'t use the escalation die.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Extra-toxic:* *Cloud of dust* is now save ends   |   |   |
|           | (11+).                                            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hellwarped Beast

[Aberrant Attack Table]{.underline}

Roll a d6 to determine what type of additional attack(s) the hellwarped
beast has, and its general characteristics. Use the first set of stats
for the brutes, and the second for the spawn.

**1. Biting mandibles +15/+11 vs. AC**---50/13 damage, and the target is
stuck (save ends); while the target is stuck this way, at the start of
the hellwarped's turn, it automatically deals 50/13 damage to the target
but can't make an *aberrant attack* that turn.

**2. Extra claw +15/+11 vs. AC**---75/19 damage (and the claw can
benefit from the *dual miss* effect).

**3. Lashing tentacle +15/+11 vs. PD**---20/5 damage, and the target is
weakened (save ends); the first time the target fails this save, it
becomes stunned instead (save ends).

**4. C: Antennae waveburst +15/+11 vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---20/5
psychic damage, and the target must roll an immediate save. If it fails,
it's confused until the end of its next turn.

**5. R: Shooting quills +15/+11 vs. AC (one nearby enemy not engaged
with it)**---40/10 damage. In addition, it takes only half damage from
opportunity attacks thanks to the spikes covering it.

**6.** *\[use only when triggered as an aberrant attack\]* **Charging
horn slam +15/+11 vs. PD**---50/13 damage, and the target is dazed (save
ends).

> *Free charge:* The hellwarped pops free from each enemy engaged with
> it after making its *claws* attacks, then moves to a nearby enemy as a
> free action and makes this attack.

#### Hellwarped Spawn

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6 + 1d4                             | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Piercing claws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---17   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *First natural odd hit each turn:* The           | * |   |
|          | hellwarped can make one *aberrant attack* as a   |   | 1 |
| Ab       | free action.                                     | * | 5 |
| erration |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Dual miss:* The hellwarped gains a cumulative   | P | 1 |
|          | +1 attack bonus to its *claw* attacks until the  | D | 8 |
|          | end of the battle.                               | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Aberrant attacks**---While building a battle   |   |   |
|          | with a hellwarped beast, roll once on the        | * |   |
|          | Aberrant Attacks table to see what type of       | * |   |
|          | attack it has. The spawn can use its *aberrant   | M |   |
|          | attack* normally, or trigger it with a piercing  | D |   |
|          | claws attack.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Infected by hell:* As creatures created by the  |   |   |
|          | energies of hellholes, hellwarped beasts are     | * |   |
|          | usually also affected by powers that affect      | * |   |
|          | demons. GM, it's your call. In exchange, feel    | H |   |
|          | free to allow the hellwarped to deal fire, cold, | P |   |
|          | acid, lightning, or thunder damage with its      | * |   |
|          | aberrant attacks.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mutated form:* Since different creatures become |   |   |
|          | hellwarped beasts, some are tougher or hardier   |   |   |
|          | than others. Before battle, roll a d6 and adjust |   |   |
|          | the hellwarped's stats accordingly.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 1\. --2 to all defenses                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 2\. +2 to all defenses                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 3\. --10% to hit points (--18)                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 4\. +10% to hit points (+18)                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 5\. --1 to all attacks                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 6\. +1 to all attacks                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Special movement:* The hellwarped has flight,   |   |   |
|          | burrow, an extra move action, the ability to     |   |   |
|          | teleport as a move action, or some other         |   |   |
|          | movement related ability of your choice.         |   |   |
|          | Decrease all its defenses by 1 due to the weak   |   |   |
|          | points this anatomy creates.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tough for its kind:* For its mutated form       |   |   |
|          | ability, choose one instead of rolling.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hellwarped Brute

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +10 + 1d4                            | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Piercing claws +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---70   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Wrecker  | *First natural odd hit each turn:* The           | * |   |
|          | hellwarped can make one *aberrant attack* as a   |   | 1 |
| Ab       | free action.                                     | * | 9 |
| erration |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Dual miss:* The hellwarped gains a cumulative   | P | 6 |
|          | +1 attack bonus to its claw attacks until the    | D | 5 |
|          | end of the battle.                               | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Aberrant attacks**---While building a battle   |   |   |
|          | with a hellwarped brute, roll twice on the       | * |   |
|          | Aberrant Attacks table to see what types of      | * |   |
|          | attacks it has. Reroll if you get the same       | M |   |
|          | result. The brute can use its *aberrant attacks* | D |   |
|          | normally, or trigger one of them with a          | * |   |
|          | *piercing claws* attack.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Infected by hell:* As creatures created by the  | * |   |
|          | energies of hellholes, hellwarped beasts are     | * |   |
|          | usually also affected by powers that affect      | H |   |
|          | demons. GM, it's your call. In exchange, feel    | P |   |
|          | free to allow the hellwarped to deal fire, cold, | * |   |
|          | acid, lightning, or thunder damage with its      | * |   |
|          | *aberrant attacks*.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mutated form:* Since different creatures become |   |   |
|          | hellwarped beasts, some are tougher or hardier   |   |   |
|          | than others. Before battle, roll a d8 and adjust |   |   |
|          | the hellwarped's stats accordingly.              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 1\. --2 to all defenses                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 2\. +2 to all defenses                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 3\. --10% to hit points (--65)                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 4\. +10% to hit points (+65)                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 5\. --1 to all attacks                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 6\. +1 to all attacks                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 7\. Only roll once on the Aberrant Attack table  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 8\. Roll three times instead of twice on the     |   |   |
|          | Aberrant Attack table                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Special movement:* The hellwarped brute has     |   |   |
|          | flight, burrow, an extra move action, the        |   |   |
|          | ability to teleport as a move action, or some    |   |   |
|          | other movement related ability of your choice.   |   |   |
|          | Decrease all its defenses by 1 due to the weak   |   |   |
|          | points this anatomy creates.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tough for its kind:* For its mutated form       |   |   |
|          | ability, choose one instead of rolling.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Horned Azinth

Due to the horned azinth's ability to move about undetected, it's likely
that the adventurers are going to run into trouble with them by
accidentally wandering into the midst of a herd. If that happens, the
horned azinth will ambush the heroes. Use this variant on the standard
ambush and surprise rules.

First, 1d3 + 1 horned azinth get to act before initiative is rolled
instead of only two of the beasts. Second, if you normally advance the
escalation die at the end of the surprise round, don't do it. The azinth
are too well concealed for momentum to favor the heroes.

#### Horned Azinth Calf

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Headbutt +8 vs. AC**---18 damage, or 24 damage  | A |   |
| level     | if the horned azinth first moves before attacking | C | 1 |
|           | an enemy it was not engaged with at the start of  | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   | its turn                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural blurring:* Attacks against the horned    | * | 1 |
|           | azinth calf have a 20% miss chance. An attacker   | * |   |
|           | must roll the miss chance before the attack roll. | P | 7 |
|           | In addition, the azinth is nearly invisible while | D | 5 |
|           | standing still or slowly grazing, as it blends in | * |   |
|           | with its surroundings.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Protect the young:* Each horned azinth adult     | M |   |
|           | gains a +1 attack bonus during a battle that      | D |   |
|           | includes one or more calves, +2 if any calves are | * |   |
|           | attacked, and +4 if any calves are killed!        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Horned Azinth Adult

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Thrashing horn +11 vs. AC**---30 damage, or 50 | A |   |
| level    | damage if the horned azinth first moves before   | C | 2 |
|          | attacking an enemy it was not engaged with at    | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | the start of its turn                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Natural even hit:* The horned azinth adult can  | * | 4 |
|          | make a *trample* attack as a quick action this   | * |   |
|          | turn.                                            | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | **Trample +10 vs. PD**---10 damage, and the      | * | 0 |
|          | horned azinth pops free from the target and can  | * |   |
|          | move nearby.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural blurring:* Attacks against the horned   | * |   |
|          | azinth adult have a 30% miss chance. An attacker | M |   |
|          | must roll the miss chance before an attack roll. | D |   |
|          | In addition, the azinth is nearly invisible      | * |   |
|          | while standing still or slowly grazing, as it    | * |   |
|          | blends in with its surroundings.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Increasing blurriness:* Increase the miss       | P |   |
|          | chance from the azinth's *natural blurring* by   | * |   |
|          | an amount equal to 5 × the escalation die.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reactive camouflage:* The first time this       |   |   |
|          | battle the azinth is staggered, it becomes       |   |   |
|          | harder to detect until the end of the battle,    |   |   |
|          | gaining a +4 bonus to all defenses.              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Human

#### Human Thug

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 1st     | **Heavy mace +5 vs. AC**---4 damage               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The thug deals +6     | * | 4 |
| Troop     | damage with its *next* attack this battle.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blue Sorcerer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Nasty dagger or short spear +8 vs. AC**---6     | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Caster    | [Minor Spell]{.underline}                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Lightning fork +8 vs. PD**---6 lightning     | * | 7 |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The sorcerer can      | D | 8 |
|           | target a different nearby enemy with the attack.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Major Spells]{.underline}                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Breath of the Blue +8 vs. PD (one nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---10 lightning damage, and at the start  | M |   |
|           | of the target's next turn, 1d6 nearby allies of   | D |   |
|           | the target take 4 lightning damage                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Chaos orb +8 vs. MD (1d3 nearby              |   |   |
|           | enemies)**---8 lightning damage                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The sorcerer gains one use of | H |   |
|           | the target's racial power, if any. It must use    | P |   |
|           | that power by the end of the battle or lose it,   | * |   |
|           | and it can't use the power this turn.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Power-monger:* When the blue sorcerer starts its |   |   |
|           | turn and it didn't *gather power* the previous    |   |   |
|           | turn, choose whether it will gather power or cast |   |   |
|           | a spell this turn. When it chooses to cast a      |   |   |
|           | spell, roll a d20 to see if it uses a minor spell |   |   |
|           | or a major spell: **1--10:** minor spell;         |   |   |
|           | **11--20:** major spell.                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Gather power:* Like a PC sorcerer, a blue        |   |   |
|           | sorcerer can use its standard action to gather    |   |   |
|           | power in order to cast a double-strength and      |   |   |
|           | double-damage spell with its next standard        |   |   |
|           | action. When it gathers power, the sorcerer rolls |   |   |
|           | a d6 and gains one of the following chaotic       |   |   |
|           | benefits.                                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **1--2:** The sorcerer gains a +1 bonus to AC     |   |   |
|           | until the start of its next turn.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **3--4:** One nearby enemy of the sorcerer's      |   |   |
|           | choice takes damage equal to sorcerer's level     |   |   |
|           | (3).                                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **5--6:** Each nearby enemy engaged with the      |   |   |
|           | sorcerer's allies takes damage equal to           |   |   |
|           | sorcerer's level (3); OR grant one nearby dragon  |   |   |
|           | with *intermittent breath* an additional use of   |   |   |
|           | its breath weapon this battle.                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Escalating caster:* Add the escalation die to    |   |   |
|           | the sorcerer's *power-monger* rolls and attack    |   |   |
|           | rolls.                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Sorcerous evasion (kobold sorcerers only):* Once |   |   |
|           | per battle when an attack misses the sorcerer,    |   |   |
|           | the attacker takes the miss damage from that      |   |   |
|           | attack, if any, and the sorcerer takes no damage. |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Demon-Touched Human Ranger

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **M or R: Demon bow +10 vs. AC**---15 damage, and | A |   |
| level     | the target is dazed (--4 attack) until it pulls   | C | 1 |
|           | the arrow out using a quick action, which deals   | * | 4 |
| Archer    | 10 ongoing damage                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The demon bow eats at  | * | 9 |
|           | the ranger's arm and the ranger takes 1d6 damage. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Bow teeth:* Whenever an attacker hits the ranger | D | 0 |
|           | with a melee attack, that creature takes 1d6      | * |   |
|           | damage as the bow chews on it.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hungry Star

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 3rd     | **Ripping tentacles +8 vs. AC**---10 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* If the target is taking       | * | 2 |
| Wrecker   | ongoing psychic damage, the attack deals +2d6     | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   | 1 |
| A         |                                                   | * | 5 |
| berration | *\[Group ability\]* **R: Warp-pulse +8 vs. PD     | * |   |
|           | (1d3 enemies in a group)**---5 ongoing psychic    | P | 5 |
|           | damage                                            | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16--18:* While the target is taking the  | * |   |
|           | ongoing psychic damage, it is dazed (--4          |   |   |
|           | attacks).                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 19--20:* While the target is taking the  | M |   |
|           | ongoing psychic damage, it is confused instead of | D |   |
|           | dazed.                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two hungry stars in    |   |   |
|           | the battle (round up), one of them can use        | * |   |
|           | *warp-pulse* once during the battle.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Limited flight:* Hungry stars flap and glide and | P |   |
|           | hover, always within seven or eight feet of the   | * |   |
|           | ground.                                           | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Hydra

#### Five-Headed Hydra

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Gnashing teeth +10 vs. AC (5 attacks)**---10   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit or miss:* The hydra's next     | * |   |
|          | *gnashing teeth* attack, if it has an attack     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | left this turn, can be against any nearby enemy  | * | 5 |
|          | instead of against a creature engaged with it.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Too tough to trick:* Whenever the hydra would   | * |   |
|          | suffer any of the following conditions, it       |   |   |
|          | ignores the condition and takes 5 damage         | * |   |
|          | instead: confused, dazed, hampered, stunned, or  | * |   |
|          | weakened.                                        | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Roiling swirl:* If the hydra has at least two   | * |   |
|          | *gnashing teeth* attacks left during a turn, it  | * |   |
|          | can expend one of those attacks to move to       |   |   |
|          | engage a nearby enemy as a free action (but it   | * |   |
|          | will take opportunity attacks for doing so).     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Sprout sixth head:* The first time the hydra is | P |   |
|          | staggered, as a free action it gains 40 hit      | * |   |
|          | points and a sixth *gnashing teeth* attack, and  | * |   |
|          | is considered undamaged at its new hit point     |   |   |
|          | total. Using the hydra's current hit points as a |   |   |
|          | new baseline, the hydra will be staggered again  |   |   |
|          | when it drops below 50% of that total.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sprout seventh head:* The second time the hydra |   |   |
|          | is staggered, as a free action it gains 40 hit   |   |   |
|          | points and a seventh *gnashing teeth* attack,    |   |   |
|          | etc. Use a new hit point baseline as before, but |   |   |
|          | there is no eighth head waiting to sprout.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sprout eighth head:* You know the drill.        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Seven-Headed Hydra

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 7th    | **Gnashing teeth +12 vs. AC (7 attacks)**---12   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit or miss:* The hydra's next     | * |   |
|          | *gnashing teeth* attack, if it has an attack     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | left this turn, can be against any nearby enemy  | * | 7 |
|          | instead of against a creature engaged with it.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 7 damage.                                | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Let's not waste space:* The seven-headed hydra  | * |   |
|          | has all the same abilities as the five-headed    |   |   |
|          | hydra, except that the heads that get sprouted   | * |   |
|          | are the 8th and 9th and those heads/attacks  | * |   |
|          | come with 50 new hit points apiece.              | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | And it has one additional ability...             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist opportunity attacks 16+:* When an        |   |   |
|          | opportunity attack targets this creature, the    | * |   |
|          | attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack   | * |   |
|          | roll or it only deals half damage.               | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Pyrohydra:* When the hydra gets a natural even  |   |   |
|          | attack roll with a *gnashing teeth* attack, its  |   |   |
|          | next attack that turn (if it has one) is a       |   |   |
|          | *flame breath* attack instead. Note that *flame  |   |   |
|          | breath* attacks don't lead to other flaming      |   |   |
|          | breaths; the hydra has to return to making a     |   |   |
|          | *gnashing teeth* attack first.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Flame breath +12 vs. PD (1d2 nearby         |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---2d12 fire damage                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Chaos Hydra

This hydra starts with four heads, but they're not always the same
heads! Roll a d6 four times before the fight begins to find out which
heads the chaos hydra starts the battle with. A head that starts the
fight may not finish the battle, heads shift mid-fight, and as usual for
hydras, new heads sprout when the creature takes serious damage.

*One attack per head:* As for the more generic hydras, each of the chaos
hydra's heads can make an attack when it uses a standard action. Unlike
those other hydras, each separate head is going to have its own attack
style, though it's possible that the hydra will randomly have two or
more of the same type of head for a couple rounds!

*Heads with bonuses:* A few of the heads provide abilities or bonuses as
well as one or two possible attacks. For a change, these bonuses are
cumulative. For example, a chaos hydra with two draconic heads would
have a +4 bonus to its AC. Since the heads shift frequently, those
bonuses won't last forever.

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | [1-2: Reptile head]{.underline}---no bonus       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Cutting teeth +13 vs. AC**---46 damage         | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   | 2 |
| Beast    | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine | * | 0 |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | [3: Serpent head]{.underline}---hydra gains +2   | * |   |
|          | PD                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Serpent teeth +13 vs. AC**---30 damage, and 10 | * |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  | * |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine | * |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | [3: Great monstrous head]{.underline}---Hydra    | P |   |
|          | gains fear aura, dazing engaged enemies with     | * |   |
|          | fewer than 48 hit points and preventing them     | * |   |
|          | from using the escalation die (for each          |   |   |
|          | additional great monstrous head, add +20 points  |   |   |
|          | to the threshold)                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Monstrous teeth +11 vs. AC**---60 damage       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine |   |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [5: Draconic head]{.underline}---hydra gains +2  |   |   |
|          | AC and adds the escalation die to its attack     |   |   |
|          | rolls for either its draconic teeth attack or    |   |   |
|          | its minor breath weapon attack                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Draconic teeth +13 vs. AC**---30 damage        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine |   |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Minor breath weapon +13 vs. PD (1 nearby    |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---40 random energy damage (roll 1d4; 1: |   |   |
|          | acid, 2: cold; 3: fire; 4: lightning)            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Make a second minor breath   |   |   |
|          | weapon attack against a random different nearby  |   |   |
|          | enemy. This second attack lacks this *natural    |   |   |
|          | even hit* trigger.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine |   |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [6: Chaos ray head]{.underline}---hydra can      |   |   |
|          | either bite with *chaotic teeth* or use *chaos   |   |   |
|          | ray* attack                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Chaotic teeth +13 vs. AC**---35 damage         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is weakened (save     |   |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine |   |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | OR                                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Chaotic ray +13 vs. PD (1 nearby or faraway |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---50 random energy damage (roll 1d4; 1: |   |   |
|          | acid, 2: cold; 3: fire; 4: lightning)            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Roll 1d4; 1: Later this      |   |   |
|          | turn, hydra can teleport somewhere nearby as a   |   |   |
|          | quick action, 2: Hydra gains flight until the    |   |   |
|          | end of its next turn, 3: The next attack which   |   |   |
|          | hits the hydra must be rerolled with a -2 attack |   |   |
|          | penalty, 4: GM: roll on the High Weirdness Table |   |   |
|          | and apply the result in the most amusing way     |   |   |
|          | possible.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* After the attack, this head  |   |   |
|          | may shift into a new head; roll 1d6 to determine |   |   |
|          | the new (or maybe repeated!) head.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reaching necks:* On its turn, the chaos hydra   |   |   |
|          | can use any of its teeth attacks against nearby  |   |   |
|          | creatures it can see and get to, but has a -2    |   |   |
|          | attack penalty when using teeth attacks against  |   |   |
|          | creatures it not engaged with.                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wild thrasher:* The chaos hydra's attacks deal  |   |   |
|          | full damage against creatures it has not already |   |   |
|          | hit this turn. If the chaos hydra attacks a      |   |   |
|          | creature it has hit earlier in the turn, the     |   |   |
|          | attack only deals half damage, hit or miss or    |   |   |
|          | crit.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Too tough to trick:* Whenever the chaos hydra   |   |   |
|          | would suffer any of the following conditions, it |   |   |
|          | ignores the condition and takes 10 damage        |   |   |
|          | instead: confused, dazed, hampered, stunned, or  |   |   |
|          | weakened.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sprout fifth head:* The first time the hydra is |   |   |
|          | staggered, as a free action it gains 70 hit      |   |   |
|          | points and a random fifth head. Roll 1d6 to      |   |   |
|          | determine which head. The chaos hydra is         |   |   |
|          | considered undamaged at its new hit point total. |   |   |
|          | Using the hydra's current hit points as a new    |   |   |
|          | baseline, the hydra will be staggered again when |   |   |
|          | it drops below 50% of that total.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sprout sixth head:* The second time the hydra   |   |   |
|          | is staggered, as a free action it gains 70 hit   |   |   |
|          | points and a random sixth head, etc. Use a new   |   |   |
|          | hit point baseline as before, but there is no    |   |   |
|          | seventh head waiting to sprout.                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Intellect Devourer

#### Intellect Devourer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +5                                     | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **C: Recall trauma +8 vs. MD (one nearby          | A |   |
| level     | enemy)**---16 psychic damage                      | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Spoiler   | *Natural even hit:* The target can't add the      | * |   |
|           | escalation die to its attacks (save ends).        |   | 1 |
| A         |                                                   | * | 9 |
| berration | **C: Ego scourge +8 vs. MD (one nearby or faraway | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---10 psychic damage, and the target must | P | 5 |
|           | choose one: take 10 extra damage; OR lose two     | D | 6 |
|           | points (cumulative) from its highest current      | * |   |
|           | background (min 0) until the next full heal-up    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Mind wipe +10 vs. MD (one nearby enemy per   | * |   |
|           | point on esc. die)**---The target can neither     | * |   |
|           | detect the intellect devourer's presence nor      | M |   |
|           | remember it was ever there to begin with. If no   | D |   |
|           | enemy in the battle remembers the devourer is     | * |   |
|           | there, remove it from play. Each nearby enemy     | * |   |
|           | immediately detects the devourer's presence if it |   |   |
|           | makes an attack or if it doesn't leave the battle | * |   |
|           | by the end of its next turn.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Exploit trauma:* The intellect devourer's crit   | * |   |
|           | range with attacks against MD expands by 2.       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      |   |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Psychovore:* An intellect devourer remembers the |   |   |
|           | current escalation die value the first time its   |   |   |
|           | host body drops to 0 hit points in a battle and   |   |   |
|           | gains a bonus equal to that value to all attacks  |   |   |
|           | and defenses until the end of the battle.         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Increased trauma:* Add the following extra       |   |   |
|           | effect trigger to the intellect devourer's        |   |   |
|           | *recall trauma* attack.                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* The target can't cast    |   |   |
|           | spells until the end of its next turn.            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Intellect Assassin

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +9                                     | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Formless fist +9 vs. PD (one enemy)**---25      | A |   |
| level     | damage; OR if the target is fighting a *psychic   | C | 1 |
|           | duel* (see below), it can choose to take a --4 to | * | 6 |
| Blocker   | penalty to its next check instead                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| A         | *Quick use:* The assassin can take 15 damage to   | * | 0 |
| berration | make this attack as a quick action (once per      | * |   |
|           | round).                                           | P | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | **C: Insidious domination +11 vs. MD (one         | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---14 damage, and the opponent is locked  | * |   |
|           | in a *psychic duel* with the assassin (see below) |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Mind thrust +10 vs. MD (one confused         | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---35 damage (but only 50 damage on a     | M |   |
|           | crit)                                             | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Exploit trauma:* An intellect assassin's crit    | * |   |
|           | range with attacks against MD expands by 2.       |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Psychovore:* An intellect devourer remembers the | * |   |
|           | current escalation die value the first time it    | * |   |
|           | becomes unhosted in a battle and gains a bonus    |   |   |
|           | equal to that value to all attacks and defenses   |   |   |
|           | until the end of the battle.                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Psychic duel:* A psychic duel occurs when the    |   |   |
|           | intellect assassin hits with an *insidious        |   |   |
|           | domination* attack against a creature. At the     |   |   |
|           | start of the creature's next turn, it must make   |   |   |
|           | an Intelligence skill check and can use a         |   |   |
|           | background that applies to psychic ability (if    |   |   |
|           | any). The result of this check determines that    |   |   |
|           | creature's status until the start of its next     |   |   |
|           | turn. To maintain the psychic duel, the assassin  |   |   |
|           | must spend a move action each turn.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Psychic Duel Result: Status]{.underline}         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **15 or less:** The creature is confused until    |   |   |
|           | the end of its turn. It also can't make           |   |   |
|           | opportunity attacks until the start of its next   |   |   |
|           | turn and takes a --2 penalty to its next psychic  |   |   |
|           | duel check.                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **16--22:** The creature is pressured---it takes  |   |   |
|           | a --2 penalty to attacks against any enemy except |   |   |
|           | the assassin (dueling opponent).                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **23--27:** The creature steadies itself and can  |   |   |
|           | use a move action this turn to escape the         |   |   |
|           | *psychic duel*. If the creature chooses not to    |   |   |
|           | (or can't) escape the duel, it gains a +2 bonus   |   |   |
|           | to its next *psychic duel* check.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **28+:** As 23--27, but the creature takes        |   |   |
|           | advantage and gains a +4 bonus to its next        |   |   |
|           | *psychic duel* check instead of +2. In addition,  |   |   |
|           | the assassin takes a --2 penalty to attack rolls  |   |   |
|           | that target other creatures.                      |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Jorogumo

#### Spinneret Doxy

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Bite of the love bug +8 vs. AC (or automatic    | A |   |
| level     | critical hit vs. an *infatuated* enemy)**---10    | C | 1 |
|           | damage, and target is *infatuated* (save ends)    | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Infatuated:* Infatuated enemies can't attack the |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | spinneret doxy or her Woven, but can convince     | * | 3 |
|           | themselves that other allies of the doxy don't    | * |   |
|           | love her properly and should be slain. They also  | P | 4 |
|           | prattle on about how their friends shouldn't      | D | 5 |
|           | attack her, but are too love-smitten to properly  | * |   |
|           | prevent it---they won't attack their real allies. | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **R: Bring me flowers +8 vs. MD (one *infatuated* | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---The target chooses one: it takes 6d6   | * |   |
|           | psychic damage; OR as a free action, it moves     | M |   |
|           | next to the spinneret doxy (possibly provoking    | D |   |
|           | opportunity attacks), who engages it              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Stop in the name of love +8 vs. MD (each     |   |   |
|           | nearby *infatuated* enemy)**---The target chooses | * |   |
|           | one: it takes 6d6 psychic damage; OR it's stuck   | * |   |
|           | (save ends)                                       | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Give me your heart:* When the doxy drops an      | * |   |
|           | enemy to 0 hit points or lower, she will move     | * |   |
|           | next to that creature and attempt to remove the   |   |   |
|           | target's heart. The creature must begin making    |   |   |
|           | last gasp saves as she cuts their chest open. On  |   |   |
|           | the fourth failure, the doxy takes the heart and  |   |   |
|           | the target dies and becomes undead under her      |   |   |
|           | control. If the bride is stunned or moved away    |   |   |
|           | from the creature and can't return to it on her   |   |   |
|           | turn, the creature doesn't have to make a last    |   |   |
|           | gasp save that turn.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lethal Lothario

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Brutal kiss +9 vs. AC**---10 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Any Woven engaged with the    | * | 8 |
| Leader    | target can attack it as a free action.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **C: Unhealthy attraction +9 vs. MD (nearby enemy | * | 7 |
|           | with the fewest hit points)**---10 psychic damage | * |   |
|           | and the target is hampered until the end of the   | P | 5 |
|           | battle or until it takes one turn as if it were   | D | 0 |
|           | confused.                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 ongoing psychic damage.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Give me your heart:* When the lothario drops an  | * |   |
|           | enemy to 0 hit points or lower, he will move next | M |   |
|           | to that creature and attempt to remove the        | D |   |
|           | target's heart. The creature must begin making    | * |   |
|           | last gasp saves as he cuts their chest open. On   | * |   |
|           | the fourth failure, the lothario takes the heart  |   |   |
|           | and the target dies and becomes undead under his  | * |   |
|           | control. If the lothario is stunned or moved away | * |   |
|           | from the creature and can't return to it on his   | H |   |
|           | turn, the creature doesn't have to make a last    | P |   |
|           | gasp save that turn.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### The Woven

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Clumsy strike +9 vs. AC**---7 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Why aren't you happy for ussss +8 vs. MD     | * | 6 |
| Mook      | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---5 psychic damage as the  | * |   |
|           | target's mind reels against the horror of the     |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | truth                                             | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Binding Bride

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Biting kiss +10 vs. AC**---18 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 10 ongoing poison | * | 5 |
| Spoiler   | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **Unwrapping my gift +10 vs. AC**---18 damage     | * | 9 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The binding bride can | P | 7 |
|           | make a *biting kiss* attack as a free action.     | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: A bouquet of webs +10 vs. PD (up to 2        | * |   |
|           | enemies in a group)**---The target is hampered    |   |   |
|           | (save ends)                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: You ruined my special day +10 vs. MD**---The | M |   |
|           | target takes 18 psychic damage each time it       | D |   |
|           | attacks the binding bride (save ends)             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.       |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Give me your heart:* When the binding bride      | * |   |
|           | drops an enemy to 0 hit points or lower, she will | H |   |
|           | move next to that creature as a free action and   | P |   |
|           | attempt to remove the target's heart. The         | * |   |
|           | creature must begin making last gasp saves as she | * |   |
|           | cuts its chest open. On the fourth failed save,   |   |   |
|           | the bride takes the heart and the target dies and |   |   |
|           | becomes undead under her control. If the bride is |   |   |
|           | stunned or moved away from the creature and can't |   |   |
|           | return to it on her turn, the creature doesn't    |   |   |
|           | have to make a last gasp save that turn.          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Swarm Prince

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Palm strike +10 vs. PD**---10 damage, and 10    | A |   |
| level     | ongoing poison damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Royal blessing +10 vs. MD**---15 negative    | * | 6 |
|           | energy damage, and if one or more Woven have been | * |   |
|           | slain this battle, return one Woven to life in    | P | 8 |
|           | the location where it died                        | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* The swarm prince can use this      | * |   |
|           | ability only when the escalation die is even.     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Hush my darling +10 vs. MD (the nearby       | * |   |
|           | conscious enemy with the fewest hit points)**---5 | M |   |
|           | psychic damage, and the target is unconscious     | D |   |
|           | (hard save ends, 16+; it also ends if the target  | * |   |
|           | takes 15 damage)                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, and the ability          | * |   |
|           | recharges when the swarm prince hits with *palm   | * |   |
|           | strike*.                                          | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Surrounded by friends:* The swarm prince gains a | * |   |
|           | +1 bonus to all defenses for each nearby Woven.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Give me your heart:* When the prince drops an    |   |   |
|           | enemy to 0 hit points or lower, he will move next |   |   |
|           | to that creature and attempt to remove the        |   |   |
|           | target's heart. The creature must begin making    |   |   |
|           | last gasp saves as he cuts their chest open. On   |   |   |
|           | the fourth failure, the prince takes the heart    |   |   |
|           | and the target dies and becomes undead under his  |   |   |
|           | control. If the prince is stunned or moved away   |   |   |
|           | from the creature and can't return to it on his   |   |   |
|           | turn, the creature doesn't have to make a last    |   |   |
|           | gasp save that turn.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Kobold

All kobolds have the *trapster* ability. When a kobold makes a
*trapster* attack and rolls a natural attack roll that is higher than
the target's Wisdom, the creature has maneuvered the target into a trap
with the attack. A creature can only be subjected to one trap per round.

When a kobold triggers its *trapster* ability, determine the damage the
trap deals by rolling a 1d4, then adding the escalation die. If there's
a dungeon-shaman in the battle, use a d8 instead of a d4.

Kobold traps can deal ongoing damage to the target instead of regular
damage, if that makes sense for the trap. For ongoing damage, roll 1d4
(or 1d8) plus the escalation die, and then subtract one (minimum 1).

Kobold traps can impose conditions upon the target, if you choose. Roll
normal trap damage, but the trap only deals half damage (minimum 1).
Then roll a d4 for the condition the trap imposes upon the target until
the end of its next turn.

1.  The target is stuck.

2.  The target is hampered.

3.  The target is dazed.

4.  The target is vulnerable.

Trap types vary according to the location/terrain and the whim of the
GM.

#### Kobold Grand Wizard

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 0 level   | **Static jolt +5 vs. AC**---2 lightning damage    | A |   |
|           |                                                   | C | 1 |
| Mook      | **R: Painful liver inversion hex +4 vs. PD**---4  | * | 3 |
|           | poison damage, or 6 poison damage against dwarves | * |   |
| Humanoid  |                                                   |   | 9 |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | * |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | * | 5 |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Archer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Simple knife +6 vs. AC**---3 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Tiny crossbow or javelin +7 vs. AC**---3     | * | 4 |
| Mook      | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | * | 0 |
|           | attacks.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | *Split off:* When one of the kobold's allies      | D |   |
|           | engages a creature engaged with the kobold, the   | * |   |
|           | kobold can pop free as a free action.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 1st     | **Spear +8 vs. AC**---4 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The kobold warrior    | * | 5 |
| Troop     | can pop free from the target.                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | * | 2 |
|           | attacks.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Not brave:* Kobold warriors with single digit    | D | 2 |
|           | hit points will run away the first chance they    | * |   |
|           | get.                                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Hero

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Shortsword +7 vs. AC**---6 damage, and each     | A |   |
| level     | nearby non-leader kobold deals +3 damage with its | C | 1 |
|           | next attack this battle that hits                 | * | 6 |
| Leader    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 3 damage.                    |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | * |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Skyclaw

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Spike-toed boots +5 vs. AC**---4 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Alchemical flask +6 vs. PD (one nearby enemy | * | 6 |
| Mook      | or a faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---3 damage, and  | * |   |
|           | roll a d4 for the effect of the flask's contents  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *1. Distilled ankheg spit:* The target takes 3    | * |   |
|           | ongoing acid damage.                              | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *2. Reconstituted remorhaz lymph:* The target     | * |   |
|           | takes 3 ongoing fire damage.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *3. Essence of giant spider web:* The target is   | * |   |
|           | stuck (save ends).                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *4. Kobold blasting powder:* There's a loud bang  | D |   |
|           | and the battlefield is obscured with thick smoke. | * |   |
|           | Each non-kobold creature takes a --2 attack       | * |   |
|           | penalty during its next turn.                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 1:* The kobold explodes (see *mook*).    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Erratic flight:* The kobold flings itself from a | P |   |
|           | trebuchet or ignites an unstable alchemical       | * |   |
|           | propellant and lands among its enemies. Each time | * |   |
|           | the kobold uses a move action to fly, roll a d20. |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *1:* It crashes and explodes (see *mook*).        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *2--15:* It lands safely.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *16+:* It stays aloft and can keep flying.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     |   |   |
|           | attacks.                                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Mook:* If an attack roll against a skyclaw is a  |   |   |
|           | natural 20 or a skyclaw rolls a natural 1 attack  |   |   |
|           | roll or flight roll, it triggers a chain reaction |   |   |
|           | that ripples through all nearby skyclaws in the   |   |   |
|           | mob; each one makes an *alchemical flask* attack  |   |   |
|           | as a free action as it explodes and dies.         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Protector Icon Warrior (Gold)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Snaggle sword +7 vs. AC**---6 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Shortbow +7 vs. AC (1 nearby enemy)**---7    | * | 5 |
| Archer    | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Natural even hit:* One ally engaged with the     | * | 2 |
|           | target can attempt to disengage as a free action. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | **R: Longshot +6 vs. AC (1 faraway enemy)**---5   | D | 8 |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Mutually destructive:* This creature's critical  |   |   |
|           | hit range against an enemy with icon relationship | * |   |
|           | points with the Protector Icon is increased by    | * |   |
|           | that enemy's number of relationship points. It's  | M |   |
|           | mutual: for every point of relationship with the  | D |   |
|           | Protector Icon, expand the critical hit range of  | * |   |
|           | attacks against the Protector Icon warrior by 1.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Berserker (Red)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Two-handed chopper +8 vs. AC**---6 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 20:* This kobold berserker mook          | * | 6 |
| Mook      | transforms into an undamaged really angry kobold  | * |   |
|           | after the attack.                                 |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *Group ability:* Each time an enemy attack        | * |   |
|           | reduces one or more kobold berserkers to 0 hit    | P | 1 |
|           | points, roll a single berserker transformation    | D | 2 |
|           | save for the entire mob of all kobold berserker   | * |   |
|           | mooks left in the battle. Add the number of       | * |   |
|           | kobold berserker mooks that were slain with the   |   |   |
|           | attack to the save (i.e., one big attacks slays   | * |   |
|           | three kobold berserker mooks, roll a d20 save and | * |   |
|           | add 3.)                                           | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Berserker transformation:* If the save result is | * |   |
|           | 6+, transform one of the remaining kobold         | * |   |
|           | berserker mooks into a really angry kobold. If    |   |   |
|           | the save result is 16+, instead transform one of  | * |   |
|           | the remaining kobold berserker mooks into a red   | * |   |
|           | haze berserker.                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Red rage:* Roll 2d20 for each of the kobold's    |   |   |
|           | attacks and use the higher result.                |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Dog-Rider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Flaming lance +8 vs. AC**---6 damage, and 3     | A |   |
| level     | ongoing fire damage                               | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Troop     | *Natural 16+:* The kobold and its steed pop free  | * |   |
|           | from all enemies and can move as a free action.   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | **R: Tiny crossbow +8 vs. AC**---9 damage, and    | * |   |
|           | the kobold and its steed can move as a free       | P | 4 |
|           | action.                                           | D | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural roll is above target's Wisdom            | * |   |
|           | (trapster):* There is line tied to the barbed     |   |   |
|           | dart, pulling/tripping the target into a trap.    | * |   |
|           | See *trapster* kobold ability.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | D |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Canine steed:* The steed can't be targeted       |   |   |
|           | separately from the kobold. If the kobold dies    | * |   |
|           | the dog runs away.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Engineer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Wrench, pick, or shovel +8 vs. AC**---8 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The engineer's kobold allies gain  | * | 7 |
| Leader    | a +2 attack bonus against the target until the    | * |   |
|           | start of the engineer's next turn.                |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | **R: Explosive flask +5 vs. PD**---The target is  | * |   |
|           | vulnerable to non-magical attacks (easy save      | P | 4 |
|           | ends, 6+)                                         | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural roll is above target's Wisdom            | * |   |
|           | (trapster):* The blast knocks the target into a   |   |   |
|           | trap. See *trapster* kobold ability.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | M |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Protector Icon Cultist (Gold)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Sword tooth +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---3 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Dart +7 vs. AC (1 nearby enemy)**---4 damage | * | 7 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Mutually destructive:* This creature's critical  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | hit range against an enemy with icon relationship | * | 3 |
|           | points with the Protector Icon is increased by    | * |   |
|           | that enemy's number of relationship points. It's  | P | 1 |
|           | mutual: for every point of relationship with the  | D | 8 |
|           | Protector Icon, expand the critical hit range of  | * |   |
|           | attacks against the Protector Icon cultist by 1.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Mystically expendable:* If a nearby Protector    | * |   |
|           | Icon priest or Protector Icon demon drake takes   | * |   |
|           | miss damage, the Protector Icon cultist can take  | M |   |
|           | it instead.                                       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Protector Icon Priest (Gold)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Demon staff +9 vs. AC**---8 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss against a 5th or      | * | 4 |
| Leader    | lower level enemy:* Demons gain a +2 attack bonus | * |   |
|           | and a +7 damage bonus against the target (hard    |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | save ends, 16+).                                  | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Flaring staff +9 vs. PD (1 nearby enemy, and | P | 4 |
|           | 1 other nearby enemy engaged with a demon)**---6  | D | 0 |
|           | fire damage                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss against a 5th or      |   |   |
|           | lower level enemy:* Demons gain a +2 attack bonus | * |   |
|           | and a +7 damage bonus against the target (hard    | * |   |
|           | save ends, 16+).                                  | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | **R: Fireburst +9 vs. PD (1 nearby or faraway     | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---12 fire damage                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* Deal 6 fire damage to the Protector Icon  | * |   |
|           | priest.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Mutually destructive:* This creature's critical  | P |   |
|           | hit range against an enemy with icon relationship | * |   |
|           | points with the Protector Icon is increased by    | * |   |
|           | that enemy's number of relationship points. It's  |   |   |
|           | mutual: for every point of relationship with the  |   |   |
|           | Protector Icon, expand the critical hit range of  |   |   |
|           | attacks against the Protector Icon priest by 1.   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Somewhat evasive:* This creature takes no damage |   |   |
|           | from enemies' misses.                             |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Really Angry Kobold (Red)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling  | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Two-handed chopper +9 vs. AC**---9 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 20:* This really angry kobold transforms | * | 7 |
| Troop     | into an undamaged red haze berserker after the    | * |   |
|           | attack.                                           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | *Weakling:* When building battles using this      | * |   |
|           | monster, it only counts as half a normal monster. | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Red rage:* Roll 2d20 for each of the kobold's    |   |   |
|           | attacks and use the higher result.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Red Haze Berserker (Red)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 3rd     | **Two-handed chopper +10 vs. AC**---10 damage     | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Deal 2d6 bonus damage | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | to the target.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Demon Drake (Gold)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | **Flashing jaws +9 vs. AC**---12 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 5 ongoing fire damage.        | * | 8 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Borrowed fire +9 vs. PD (1 nearby            |   | 1 |
| Demon     | enemy)**---20 fire damage                         | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, and only targeting a     | P | 5 |
|           | creature that is presently saving against the     | D | 0 |
|           | effect of a Protector Icon priest's staff attack. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Mutually destructive:* This creature's critical  |   |   |
|           | hit range against an enemy with icon relationship | * |   |
|           | points with the Protector Icon is increased by    | * |   |
|           | that enemy's number of relationship points. It's  | M |   |
|           | mutual: for every point of relationship with the  | D |   |
|           | Protector Icon, expand the critical hit range of  | * |   |
|           | attacks against the demon drake by 1.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Demon drakes fly like bat-winged        | * |   |
|           | dragons. Funny that.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Assassin (Black)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 4th     | **Black acid blade +9 vs. AC**---7 damage, and 5  | A |   |
| level     | special acid ongoing damage (no save; this        | C | 1 |
|           | special damage only ends if the creature affected | * | 9 |
| Spoiler   | uses a standard action to shake off all the       | * |   |
|           | special ongoing damage)                           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | *Miss:* 4 damage.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | **R: Blackscale throwing star +9 vs. AC (one      | D | 6 |
|           | nearby enemy)**---5 damage, or 10 damage against  | * |   |
|           | a creature taking special ongoing acid damage.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 2-5:* Make another *blackscale throwing  | * |   |
|           | star* attack against a different nearby enemy.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Skitter:* The kobold assassin can choose to roll | D |   |
|           | an 11 whenever it rolls a disengage check. (In    | * |   |
|           | other words, it can get away from any one normal  | * |   |
|           | enemy, it takes two enemies and/or the need to    |   |   |
|           | roll at least a 12 to force the kobold assassin   | * |   |
|           | to actually roll the check.)                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Bravescale

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Spear +9 vs. AC**---13 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural roll is above target's Wisdom            | * | 8 |
| Blocker   | (trapster):* The kobold pushes or trips the       | * |   |
|           | target into a trap. See *trapster* kobold         |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | ability.                                          | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Disciplined maneuver:* If the escalation die is  | P | 5 |
|           | 3+ and this creature has at least two bravescale  | D | 5 |
|           | allies in the battle, whenever an enemy moves to  | * |   |
|           | engage the bravescale, it can make a *spear       | * |   |
|           | porcupine* attack against that enemy as a free    |   |   |
|           | action.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Spear porcupine +11 vs. AC**---10 damage        | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Lock shields:* For each other kobold bravescale  | * |   |
|           | next to the bravescale or engaged with a creature | * |   |
|           | that this bravescale is engaged with, the         |   |   |
|           | bravescale gains a +2 bonus to AC (maximum of     | * |   |
|           | +4), and each enemy engaged with the bravescale   | * |   |
|           | takes a --2 penalty (maximum of --4) to disengage | H |   |
|           | checks.                                           | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Dungeon-Shaman

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Bear traps on chains +9 vs. AC (2              | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---13 damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| Caster   | *Natural roll is above target's Wisdom           | * |   |
|          | (trapster):* The kobold drags the target into a  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | trap. See *trapster* kobold ability.             | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Hex of entrapment +9 vs. MD**---26 damage   | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 1 |
|          | *Natural roll is above target's Wisdom           | * | 0 |
|          | (trapster):* The kobold summons a trap that was  | * |   |
|          | not previously there, which the target triggers. |   |   |
|          | See *trapster* kobold ability.                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The target is stuck and hampered (save   | M |   |
|          | ends both).                                      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed    | * |   |
|          | attacks.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Shadow-Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **C: Throwing star +9 vs. AC (one nearby          | A |   |
| level     | enemy)**---7 damage                               | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| Mook      | **C: Stinging dust +6 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemies in a group)**---5 damage, and the target  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | takes a --1 penalty to attacks until the end of   | * | 7 |
|           | its next turn                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | *Elusive:* If a shadow-warrior hasn't been        | D | 4 |
|           | attacked since the end of its last turn, it can   | * |   |
|           | spend all of its actions on its turn to disappear | * |   |
|           | from sight (remove it from play as it gets into   |   |   |
|           | position). At the start of its next turn, it      | * |   |
|           | reappears (dropping down from the ceiling or      | * |   |
|           | springing out of cover and re-entering play) and  | M |   |
|           | can make an *elusive strike* attack as a standard | D |   |
|           | action.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Elusive strike +13 vs. AC (one nearby        |   |   |
|           | creature)**---18 damage                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed     | H |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* A kobold shadow-warrior can climb | * |   |
|           | on ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on    |   |   |
|           | the ground.                                       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kobold Dragon-Soul

+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Normal   | Initiative: +10                                 | * | 22 |
|          |                                                 | * |    |
| 5th    | **Claws +10 vs. AC**---17 damage                | A | 19 |
| level    |                                                 | C |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target also takes 8     | * | 14 |
| Troop    | ongoing acid damage.                            | * |    |
|          |                                                 |   | 70 |
| Humanoid | **R: Fire spit +10 vs. PD**---18 fire damage    | * |    |
|          |                                                 | * |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* If flying, the kobold can   | P |    |
|          | remain in the air until the end of its next     | D |    |
|          | turn if it would normally have to land at the   | * |    |
|          | end of this turn.                               | * |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | *Evasive:* Kobolds take no damage from missed   | * |    |
|          | attacks.                                        | * |    |
|          |                                                 | M |    |
|          | *Flight:* A dragon-soul's wings aren\'t strong  | D |    |
|          | enough for sustained flapping flight, but with  | * |    |
|          | a headwind and a tall place to launch from it   | * |    |
|          | can glide for hours. During battle, however, it |   |    |
|          | must land at the end of its turn if the         | * |    |
|          | escalation die is even (but see *fire spit*).   | * |    |
|          |                                                 | H |    |
|          |                                                 | P |    |
|          |                                                 | * |    |
|          |                                                 | * |    |
+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                 |   |    |
+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Kobold Glinter (Blue)

+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                  | * | 21 |
|          |                                                 | * |    |
| 5th    | **Slick, stabby blade +10 vs. AC**---9 damage   | A | 21 |
| level    |                                                 | C |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Each other glinter in the battle | * | 16 |
| Mook     | gains a +1 attack bonus (cumulative) until the  | * |    |
|          | end of the turn.                                |   | 15 |
| Humanoid |                                                 | * |    |
|          | **R: Stick-launched dart +10 vs. AC**---9       | * |    |
|          | damage                                          | P |    |
|          |                                                 | D |    |
|          | *Limited use:* A mob of glinters can use this   | * |    |
|          | attack only once during the battle. On the turn | * |    |
|          | that they use the attack, each glinter in the   |   |    |
|          | mob can choose whether to make the attack or    | * |    |
|          | not. Any who don't use it, lose it.             | * |    |
|          |                                                 | M |    |
|          | *Home turf tricks:* The first time each enemy   | D |    |
|          | in a battle attacks a glinter mob, it must roll | * |    |
|          | a save; on a failure, that attack is negated.   | * |    |
|          | The glinters have traps, hidden weapons, trick  |   |    |
|          | furniture, and other resources that they can    | * |    |
|          | use against attackers. Improvise some trick,    | * |    |
|          | ideally involving scorpions, that either        | H |    |
|          | protects the kobolds from the attack or         | P |    |
|          | interferes with the attacker, assuming the      | * |    |
|          | glinters are on familiar ground.                | * |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | *Stubborn resilience:* Whenever three or more   |   |    |
|          | glinters drop from a single attack (possibly    |   |    |
|          | involving multiple attack rolls), one-third of  |   |    |
|          | those glinters are undamaged instead (round     |   |    |
|          | down).                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | *Free-form ability---Unstoppability:* Glinters  |   |    |
|          | can pour through small openings in large        |   |    |
|          | numbers, crowd into tight spaces, scramble over |   |    |
|          | or through obstacles, and otherwise get into    |   |    |
|          | places faster than you would believe. This      |   |    |
|          | trait helps them overwhelm enemies with numbers |   |    |
|          | that the unfortunate targets don't believes is  |   |    |
|          | possible.                                       |   |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                  |   |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | *Bitter resolve:* When a glinter mob is reduced |   |    |
|          | to half its number or less, the surviving       |   |    |
|          | glinters gain a +4 bonus to all defenses until  |   |    |
|          | the end of the battle.                          |   |    |
|          |                                                 |   |    |
|          | *Coordinated strike:* Once per battle as a free |   |    |
|          | action, the glinter mob can utter a war cry in  |   |    |
|          | unison and each member of the mob gains a +4    |   |    |
|          | attack bonus that turn.                         |   |    |
+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                 |   |    |
+----------+-------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Kohwa

[Abilities for all kohwa]{.underline}

*Flight:* Kohwa are winged, and therefore capable of flight. While they
are strong fliers and able to travel great distances in this way, they
are acutely aware of how ungainly they look while doing so, and
therefore prefer to walk or run unless they are certain no one is
watching.

*Swimming:* Unlike many cat species, kohwa are perfectly at home in the
water, so diving into a lake or river is a poor defense against them.

*Telepathy:* Kohwa are capable of short-range telepathy with non-kohwa.
It is assumed (although no one is entirely sure) that they are capable
of communicating with others of their species at greater distances, as
when one is in trouble, others are sure to appear---eventually.

#### Kohwa Messenger

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Jaws of steel +9 vs. AC**---30 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **R: Piercing gaze +9 vs. PD**---24 lightning    | * | 0 |
| Caster   | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Natural odd roll:* Each time the kohwa          | * | 9 |
|          | messenger makes a natural odd roll when using    | * |   |
|          | this attack, it can immediately make another     | P | 1 |
|          | *piercing gaze* attack roll against a different  | D | 6 |
|          | target it has not already targeted this turn.    | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Judgment of the gods +11 vs. PD (1d4 nearby |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---40 psychic damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural roll above Wisdom:* The target is dazed | M |   |
|          | (normal save ends).                              | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle while staggered.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Invocation of the gods' protection:* Once per   | H |   |
|          | battle, as a quick action, the kohwa messenger   | P |   |
|          | can invoke the protection of their unknown gods. | * |   |
|          | Once the invocation has been made, at the start  | * |   |
|          | of each of the messenger's turns, roll 1d6. As   |   |   |
|          | long as the roll is equal to or less than the    |   |   |
|          | escalation die, critical hits against the        |   |   |
|          | messenger and its allies only inflict normal     |   |   |
|          | damage (although they do still trigger the kohwa |   |   |
|          | enforcer's *acid rain* attack, if appropriate).  |   |   |
|          | As soon as the roll fails, the protection        |   |   |
|          | lapses.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Implacable dread +11 vs. MD**---The target  |   |   |
|          | is weakened (normal save ends). During the next  |   |   |
|          | round, if the target is unengaged, it takes no   |   |   |
|          | action other than to move away from the          |   |   |
|          | messenger. If engaged, then the target's first   |   |   |
|          | action is to attempt to disengage from its foe,  |   |   |
|          | moving away if successful. If the target fails   |   |   |
|          | the disengage check, they use their second       |   |   |
|          | action to move away, inviting opportunity        |   |   |
|          | attacks                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Cannot be used until the          |   |   |
|          | escalation die reaches 4+.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* The target develops a deep and abiding   |   |   |
|          | mistrust of all kohwa.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kohwa Enforcer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Tooth and claw +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---24   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Troop    | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Beast    | **R: Spit shot +10 vs. PD (1 nearby or faraway   | * | 1 |
|          | enemy)**---42 cold damage. One of the few times  | * |   |
|          | a kohwa can be heard to make a noise, the        | P | 2 |
|          | horrific yowl that accompanies this attack       | D | 3 |
|          | heralds a stinging barrage of freezing           | * | 0 |
|          | hailstones                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fury of the gods:* When staggered, the kohwa    | * |   |
|          | enforcer gains a bonus to damage equal to triple | * |   |
|          | the escalation die.                              | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Acid rain:* The first time the enforcer is      | * |   |
|          | struck by a critical hit, provided it survives   | * |   |
|          | the blow, it sprays horrible acidic urine on its |   |   |
|          | enemies using its *pitter patter* attack as a    | * |   |
|          | free action.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Pitter patter +12 vs. PD | P |   |
|          | (1d4 nearby enemies)**---20 acid damage and 15   | * |   |
|          | ongoing acid damage (normal save ends)           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Leaps and bounds:* If the enforcer is unengaged |   |   |
|          | and moves to engage an enemy, it can make a      |   |   |
|          | *leaping strike* attack as a standard action.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Leaping strike +12 vs.   |   |   |
|          | AC**---54 damage and target is hampered while    |   |   |
|          | still engaged                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Koruku

#### Koruku Larva

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Snapping claws +10 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---7     | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | *Natural even hit:* The koruku larva can make a   | * |   |
|           | *blood-sucking proboscis* attack against the      |   | 1 |
| Beast     | target as a quick action this turn.               | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Blood-sucking proboscis +10 vs. AC**---9 damage | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural 16+ hit:* The target takes 5 additional  | * |   |
|           | damage and the koruku larva can heal 5 hit        | * |   |
|           | points.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Acid blood:* Each creature engaged with a        | * |   |
|           | damaged koruku larva at the start of its turn     | M |   |
|           | takes 2d6 acid damage.                            | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Join with us:* The koruku larva can physically   | * |   |
|           | and magically bond with a willing humanoid, or a  |   |   |
|           | humanoid it has reduced to 0 hp, and evolve over  | * |   |
|           | the course of a day into a koruku symbiont.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Koruku Symbiont

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 7th     | **Crashing fist or weapon +12 vs. AC**---25       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| Spoiler   | *Natural 16+ hit:* The target is weakened (normal | * |   |
|           | save ends) and the koruku symbiont can pop free   |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  | of the target.                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Stinging tentacles +12 vs. AC (2                | P | 9 |
|           | attacks)**---15 damage                            | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 8 ongoing    | * |   |
|           | poison damage (normal save ends).                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 1-5:* The koruku symbiont can make an    | * |   |
|           | *acid spew* attack as a quick action.             | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Limited use:* When the escalation die 2+.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Acid spew +12 vs.      |   |   |
|           | PD**---20 acid damage                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered        | H |   |
|           | (normal save ends).                               | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Wrathful tsunami +12 vs. PD (1d3 nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemies in a group)**---28 damage                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is stunned until   |   |   |
|           | the end of its next turn.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle when the escalation die   |   |   |
|           | is 4+.                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Scuttle forth:* When the koruku symbiont drops   |   |   |
|           | to 0 hit points, it rolls a normal save (11+). If |   |   |
|           | the save succeeds, place a 5th level koruku     |   |   |
|           | larva with 30 hit points on the battlefield where |   |   |
|           | it has detached itself from its former host. The  |   |   |
|           | staggered larva maintains the initiative of its   |   |   |
|           | host, but any conditions placed upon the host     |   |   |
|           | end. (If the save fails, the larva gets squashed  |   |   |
|           | along with its host!)                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *It's been fun:* When the koruku symbiont is      |   |   |
|           | nearby a behemoth, the koruku detaches itself     |   |   |
|           | from its host and leaps onto the behemoth. Once   |   |   |
|           | it finds a likely spot for hibernation is secrets |   |   |
|           | a slime which hardens into a cocoon. The host     |   |   |
|           | reverts back to its original stats, losing all of |   |   |
|           | the benefits it gained as a symbiont, but takes   |   |   |
|           | no damage.                                        |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Koruku Landkiller

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Thrashing tail +13 vs. AC (one nearby          | A |   |
| level    | enemy)**---80 damage                             | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Leader   | *Miss:* 40 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *First miss:* The koruku landkiller makes a      | * | 9 |
|          | second *thrashing tail* attack against a         | * |   |
|          | different target.                                | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 3 |
|          | *Natural 1-5 on either attack:* The koruku       | * | 2 |
|          | landkiller regains its *stolen magic* attack if  | * |   |
|          | it's expended.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Earth-gouging plates +13 vs. PD (2             | * |   |
|          | attacks)**---55 damage                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Escalating saves:* The koruku landkiller adds   | * |   |
|          | twice the escalation die to its saves.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stolen magic:* Once per battle as a standard    | * |   |
|          | action, a koruku landkiller can make one of the  | * |   |
|          | following magical attacks. The first five        | H |   |
|          | attacks can add the escalation die when rolled   | P |   |
|          | against a target that has an icon relationship   | * |   |
|          | with the icon the power has been stolen from!    | * |   |
|          | Feel free to roll a d6 if you don't want to      |   |   |
|          | spend time choosing between attacks. (If its     |   |   |
|          | *thrashing tail* attack roll allows the          |   |   |
|          | landkiller to regain *stolen magic*, it doesn't  |   |   |
|          | have to choose which magical attack it will use  |   |   |
|          | until it actually uses the attack.)              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Flame of the Magic Icon +13 vs. PD (1d3     |   |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---114    |   |   |
|          | fire damage                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* One nearby koruku servitor   |   |   |
|          | can make a *wild magic blast* attack (fire       |   |   |
|          | damage) as a free action.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Snare of the Nature Icon+13 vs. PD (1d3     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies in a group)**---90 damage and the |   |   |
|          | target is stuck (normal save ends)               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* All nearby koruku servitors   |   |   |
|          | gain a +4 attack bonus against stuck targets on  |   |   |
|          | their next turn.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Roar of the Brute Icon +13 vs. MD (1d4      |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---90 thunder damage, and       |   |   |
|          | koruku servitors gain a +4 attack bonus against  |   |   |
|          | the target on their next turn                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Treachery of the Draconic Icon +13 vs. MD   |   |   |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---80 psychic damage and   |   |   |
|          | the target is confused (normal save ends)        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* Add a cumulative +2 to the    |   |   |
|          | defenses of all koruku servitors until the end   |   |   |
|          | of the servitors' next turn.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Storm of the Zealous Icon +13 vs. AC (1d3   |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---114 damage                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* All nearby koruku servitors   |   |   |
|          | gain a +4 damage bonus until the end of their    |   |   |
|          | next turn.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Wrath of the sea +13 vs. PD (all nearby     |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---70 lightning damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+ hit:* Add a koruku servitor to the  |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 35 lightning damage.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *So many servitors:* When the koruku landkiller  |   |   |
|          | is hit by an attack, add a koruku servitor to    |   |   |
|          | the battle.                                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Koruku Servitor

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +16                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 8th     | **Wild magic touch +13 vs. AC**---23 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 1-5:* The koruku servitor takes 10       | * | 9 |
| Mook      | damage and the target gains a random Wild Magic   | * |   |
|           | Benefit from the table below.                     |   | 2 |
| Spirit    |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *Wild Magic Benefit*                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *1--2:* You gain a +2 bonus to all defenses until | D | 0 |
|           | the start of your next turn.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *3--4:* Heal hit points equal to your level +     |   |   |
|           | twice your Charisma, Intelligence, or Wisdom      | * |   |
|           | modifier (whichever is highest).                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *5--6:* Roll to recharge a single expended magic  | D |   |
|           | item power or expended recharge power.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Wild magic burst +13 vs. PD (all enemies     |   |   |
|           | engaged with the koruku servitor)**---36 damage   | * |   |
|           | and deal 40 damage to this koru servitor          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Limited use:* When the escalation die is 4+.     | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Wild magic blast +13 vs. PD (one nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---23 damage                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Koruku servitors fade away if they fly  |   |   |
|           | too far from their koruku landkiller, but are     |   |   |
|           | quick and agile fliers in battle.                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Kroma Dragonic

[Nastier Specials for All Kroma Dragonics]{.underline}

If you'd like to make your dragonic wyrmspawn more deadly, give them
wings and limited flight. Or if your dragonics have the blood of the
mighty wyrms flowing through them (or the magic of dragons has worn off
on them), consider giving some of them a random dragon ability.

*Limited flight:* At the start of each turn, roll a d6. If the result is
less than or equal to the escalation die, the dragonic gains flight as a
move action during its turns thanks to a pair of wings it unfurls from
its back. The flight tends to be more power-flapping or gliding from one
place to another rather than hovering. Flamewings who also have limited
flight prefer to use their burning wings to fly in combat wherever
possible, resorting to their physical wings only if needed.

*Blood of the wyrm:* This dragonic displays traits of its forebears, the
mighty wyrms. Roll a d10 and consult the random dragon ability table, or
choose one of the first ten options that looks likely to shape the story
or battle.

#### Greenscale Wild Stalker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Poisoned claws +8 vs. AC**---4 damage, and 3    | A |   |
| level     | ongoing poison damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Archer    | *First failed save:* The ongoing poison damage    | * |   |
|           | increases by 2.                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Second failed save:* The target is also weakened | * |   |
|           | (save ends both).                                 | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | **R: Poisonous spit +8 vs. PD**---8 poison damage | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is partially       |   |   |
|           | blinded and takes a --2 penalty to attacks and    | * |   |
|           | defenses until the end of its next turn.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Superior camouflage:* The wild stalker's scales  | D |   |
|           | naturally change to blend with its surroundings,  | * |   |
|           | allowing it to hide in plain sight and making     | * |   |
|           | checks to detect it take a --5 penalty. When it   |   |   |
|           | attacks from concealment without being seen       | * |   |
|           | first, the target is vulnerable to its attack. It | * |   |
|           | can regain its camouflage by moving out of direct | H |   |
|           | sight and hiding (hard DC to spot).               | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist poison 14+:* When a poison attack targets | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bluescale Lightning Caller

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Sharp claws +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---6 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Jagged lightning +10 vs. PD (up to 2 nearby  | * | 4 |
| Caster    | enemies)**---6 lightning damage                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *First natural even hit each turn:* The lightning | * | 8 |
|           | caller can target another nearby enemy with       | * |   |
|           | *jagged lightning*.                               | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | **C: Lightning breath +10 vs. PD (each enemy      | * |   |
|           | engaged with the lightning caller)**---2          | * |   |
|           | lightning damage, and the target pops free from   |   |   |
|           | the lightning caller                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.       | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Call lightning minion:* Once per battle as a     | * |   |
|           | move action, the lightning caller can summon 1d2  | * |   |
|           | small lightning minions that protect it. They     |   |   |
|           | look like small dragons made of lightning that    | * |   |
|           | circle around the caller and can't be attacked    | * |   |
|           | directly. When an enemy attacks the lightning     | H |   |
|           | caller, one minion makes a *lightning zap* attack | P |   |
|           | against it as an interrupt action. All minions    | * |   |
|           | dissipate at the end of battle.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Lightning zap +10 vs. PD (one enemy attacking   |   |   |
|           | the lightning caller)**---3 lightning damage, the |   |   |
|           | target takes a --2 penalty to the attack, and the |   |   |
|           | minion dissipates.                                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist lightning 14+:* When a lightning attack   |   |   |
|           | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a   |   |   |
|           | natural 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals   |   |   |
|           | half damage.                                      |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Whitescale Rime Walker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Rime-coated spear +10 vs. AC**---10 damage and  | A |   |
| level     | 5 cold damage                                     | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Troop     | *Natural even hit:* The rime walker can make a    | * |   |
|           | *frost breath* attack against the target as a     |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | free action. This use of *frost breath* doesn't   | * | 3 |
|           | count toward the 1/battle limit.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | **C: Frost breath +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby          | D | 5 |
|           | enemies)**---8 cold damage                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is stuck (save ends).   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Coated in rime:* As a free action at the start   | D |   |
|           | of the battle, the rime walker breathes a cloud   | * |   |
|           | of frost that coats it in rime. The next attack   | * |   |
|           | that hits it this battle deals only half damage.  |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist cold 14+:* When a cold attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | H |   |
|           | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | P |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blackscale Shadow Dancer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Scale blade +11 vs. AC**---18 damage, and the   | A |   |
| level     | shadow dancer can pop free from the target        | C | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| Troop     | **C: Shadow vapors +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby         | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---10 acid damage                       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *Shadows everywhere:* Hit or miss, the nearby     | * |   |
|           | area around the shadow dancer is filled with      | P | 8 |
|           | shadowy vapors until the end of the battle that   | D | 0 |
|           | make it difficult to see. Other creatures besides | * |   |
|           | shadow dancers in the vapors take a --2 penalty   | * |   |
|           | to attacks and defenses.                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | **R: Hand crossbow +11 vs. AC**---20 damage       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Step into the shadows:* Twice per battle as a    | * |   |
|           | move action, a shadow dancer can step in heavy    |   |   |
|           | shadows, or shadows created by its shadow vapors, | * |   |
|           | and step back out of nearby or faraway shadows.   | * |   |
|           | It often uses this ability to move next to a      | H |   |
|           | target. When it attacks an enemy after stepping   | P |   |
|           | out of the shadows, it gains a +2 bonus for that  | * |   |
|           | attack.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Resist acid 14+:* When an acid attack targets    |   |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      |   |   |
|           | damage.                                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | AC 21                                             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | PD 21 HP 80                                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | MD 16                                             |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Redscale Fiery Vanquisher

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Heavy axe +12 vs. AC**---26 damage             | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The fiery vanquisher | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | can make a *burning breath* attack against the   | * |   |
|          | target as a free action.                         |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Burning breath +11    | * |   |
|          | vs. PD (one nearby enemy)**---3 fire damage, and | P | 1 |
|          | 5 ongoing fire damage                            | D | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Red rage:* When the escalation die is odd, the  | * |   |
|          | fiery vanquisher can roll two d20s for its       |   |   |
|          | *heavy axe* attack and use the best result.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 14+:* When a fire attack targets    | M |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | D |   |
|          | 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Whitescale Blighter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Frost claws +13 vs. AC**---20 damage, and 15   | * | 2 |
| Leader   | cold damage                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Natural even hit or miss:* The damage for all   | * | 9 |
|          | subsequent cold attacks this battle increases by | * |   |
|          | 1 (to a maximum of 4 extra cold damage).         | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | *Crit:* Each enemy that doesn't have resistance  | * | 0 |
|          | to cold damage becomes vulnerable to cold damage | * |   |
|          | until the end of the battle, and the cold damage |   |   |
|          | increase for all cold damage attacks resets.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss against a stuck target:* 10 cold damage.   | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **C: Blizzard breath +13 vs. PD (1d3 nearby      | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---18 cold damage                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target is stuck  | * |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Escalating cold:* All whitescale dragonics in   | P |   |
|          | the battle can use the escalation die. This      | * |   |
|          | monster's escalating cold ability ends for this  | * |   |
|          | battle if it takes fire damage.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist cold 16+:* When a cold attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Gift of rime:* As a free action at the start of |   |   |
|          | the battle, and also once per turn as a quick    |   |   |
|          | action, the whitescale blighter breathes a cloud |   |   |
|          | of frost that coats it or a nearby whitescale    |   |   |
|          | dragonic in rime. The next attack that hits the  |   |   |
|          | rime-covered whitescale this battle deals only   |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tail whip:* The dragonic deals 2d4 extra damage |   |   |
|          | to a target it misses with a melee attack.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Undead killer:* The whitescale blighter hates   |   |   |
|          | undead and necromancers, and its crit range      |   |   |
|          | expands by 1 against them.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Greenscale Spineback

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Needle teeth +14 vs. AC**---20 poison damage,  | A |   |
| level    | and 15 ongoing poison damage                     | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 16+:* The target becomes vulnerable to  | * |   |
|          | poison damage until the end of the battle.       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | Creatures that resist poison damage ignore this  | * | 9 |
|          | effect.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Crit:* The target loses all its resistances and | D | 6 |
|          | is weakened until the end of its next turn.      | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Spine barrage +16 vs. AC**---25 damage, and |   |   |
|          | 25 ongoing poison damage                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, but missing with the    | M |   |
|          | attack doesn't expend it.                        | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Poison cloud +14 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies | * |   |
|          | in a group)**---25 poison damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The crit range for this      | * |   |
|          | attack expands by 1 (to a maximum of 16+).       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 poison damage.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hallucinogenic exhalation:* The first time this |   |   |
|          | greenscale spineback becomes staggered, each     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy must roll a save. If it fails, it's |   |   |
|          | confused and takes 10 ongoing poison damage      |   |   |
|          | (save ends both). Enemies who resist poison are  |   |   |
|          | immune to this effect.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist poison 16+:* When a poison attack        |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Elf killer:* The spineback hates elves, and its |   |   |
|          | crit range expands by 1 against them.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tail whip:* The dragonic deals 2d6 extra damage |   |   |
|          | to a target it misses with a melee attack.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Toxic skin:* This spineback is not so much      |   |   |
|          | scaly as slimy like a rare toxic frog. When an   |   |   |
|          | enemy makes an unarmed attack against it or      |   |   |
|          | otherwise grapples with the dragonic, that enemy |   |   |
|          | takes 2d6 poison damage.                         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blackscale Light-Killer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | **Blackened blade +14 vs. AC**---40 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 10 ongoing acid damage.      | * | 5 |
| Archer   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* The blackscale light-killer |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | gains a darkness token (see below).              | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Acidic breath +16 vs. PD (1d3 nearby        | P | 2 |
|          | enemies)**---25 acid damage                      | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 12 ongoing acid damage.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *First natural even miss each turn:* The         | * |   |
|          | blackscale light-killer gains a darkness token   | * |   |
|          | (see below).                                     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Darkness spreads:* The light-killer can expend  | * |   |
|          | a darkness token as a quick action to make a     | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy weakened until the end of its next  |   |   |
|          | turn. Enemies that don't need to see to fight or | * |   |
|          | who can pierce magical darkness ignore this      | * |   |
|          | effect.                                          | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Resist acid 16+:* When an acid attack targets   | * |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  | * |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Darkling maw:* The blackscale light-killer      |   |   |
|          | gains a darkness token on odd misses too.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Speed of dark:* Instead of a quick action to    |   |   |
|          | use darkness spreads, it's a free action. Wait   |   |   |
|          | and use it just before a PC attacks.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tail whip:* The dragonic deals 2d8 extra damage |   |   |
|          | to a target it misses with a melee attack.       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Bluescale Orb-Bearer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | **Crackling energy +16 vs. PD**---40 force       | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Caster   | *Natural 16+:* 16 ongoing lightning damage.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **C: Lightning breath +20 vs. PD (one nearby     | * | 6 |
|          | enemy)**---30 lightning damage, and 30 ongoing   | * |   |
|          | lightning damage                                 | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *Aftereffect:* If the target rolled an even save | * | 0 |
|          | against the ongoing lightning damage, the        | * |   |
|          | target's nearest ally takes 10 ongoing lightning |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 lightning damage.                     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **R: Force barbs +16 vs. PD (up to 3 nearby or   | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---40 force damage  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Absorb magic:* The first time this battle that  | * |   |
|          | the bluescale orb-bearer is hit by a magic spell | * |   |
|          | or spell-like power it has no effect---the       | H |   |
|          | attack hits but does no damage, imposes no       | P |   |
|          | conditions, etc. Each time it's hit this way     | * |   |
|          | thereafter, the bluescale takes no damage and    | * |   |
|          | can make the following attack as a free action:  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Arcane discharge +20 vs. PD (one nearby or  |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---24 damage and 24 ongoing      |   |   |
|          | damage, both of the same damage type of the      |   |   |
|          | spell that it absorbed                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist lightning 16+:* When a lightning attack  |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tail whip:* The dragonic deals 2d10 extra       |   |   |
|          | damage to a target it misses with a melee        |   |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Esoteric expulsion:* When the orb-bearer dies   |   |   |
|          | having absorbed a spell but not having released  |   |   |
|          | the energy via arcane discharge, roll a d6:      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1: Spatial bend**---Whoever made the attack    |   |   |
|          | that finished the orb-bearer swaps places with   |   |   |
|          | the ally or enemy furthest from them.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **2: Time twist**---The last character to act    |   |   |
|          | disappears, and reappears in the same place at   |   |   |
|          | the end of their next turn.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **3: Esoteric detonation**---The 1d3 + 1 closest |   |   |
|          | creatures take 10 force damage and 10 ongoing    |   |   |
|          | lightning damage.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4: Weird expulsion**---Something harmlessly    |   |   |
|          | odd happens, centered on the area around the     |   |   |
|          | body: a rain of frogs, or colored lights start   |   |   |
|          | to dance, or a glowing cloud appears, etc.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **5: Bizarre expulsion**---Something             |   |   |
|          | distractingly odd happens that causes one random |   |   |
|          | enemy and one random ally to be dazed until the  |   |   |
|          | end of their next turns: their local gravity     |   |   |
|          | becomes warped, they blaze with coruscating      |   |   |
|          | light, they briefly turn inside out, etc.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6: Stranger expulsion**---Something            |   |   |
|          | dangerously odd happens, dealing 40 ongoing      |   |   |
|          | damage to the nearest enemy to the orb-bearer    |   |   |
|          | and perhaps having a lingering effect after the  |   |   |
|          | battle: target ages or becomes younger rapidly,  |   |   |
|          | target enveloped in ice, target's skin catches   |   |   |
|          | fire, etc.                                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Redscale Flamewing

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Burning mace +17 vs. AC (1 or 2                | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---45 damage and 45 fire damage,       | C | 2 |
|          | divided between the targets if two different     | * | 6 |
| Wrecker  | enemies are hit, or piled onto one target if     | * |   |
|          | only one target is hit.                          |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | **R: Fireball breath +17 vs. AC (1d3 nearby or   | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---60 fire damage   | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 fire damage.                          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Special:* The redscale flamewing can instead    |   |   |
|          | target 2d3 enemies in a group, but with a        | * |   |
|          | different miss effect:                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Special miss:* Any ally of the flamewing        | D |   |
|          | engaged with the missed target takes 20 fire     | * |   |
|          | damage, and the flamewing loses its ability to   | * |   |
|          | fly using its *fiery wings* until the end of the |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Fiery wings +17 vs. AC (1d3 closest nearby  | H |   |
|          | enemies)**---60 fire damage                      | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Attack on the wing:* The flamewing can make     | * |   |
|          | attacks mid-movement as it flies past without    |   |   |
|          | taking opportunity attacks, but at a --2 attack  |   |   |
|          | penalty. It can split its *burning mace* attack  |   |   |
|          | between two enemies in two locations as it flies |   |   |
|          | past. As its wings are made of fire, the         |   |   |
|          | flamewing might accidentally set the environment |   |   |
|          | ablaze, which might benefit one side or the      |   |   |
|          | other in the battle (or harm both).              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fiery temper:* When the flamewing is forced to  |   |   |
|          | land, it rolls 3d20 for its next attack roll and |   |   |
|          | takes the best result.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* The flamewing can fly, and fly         |   |   |
|          | fast---soaring on wings of flame. However, its   |   |   |
|          | turning circle isn't great and it can't hover,   |   |   |
|          | so in tight quarters it needs to land. Also, its |   |   |
|          | wings are made of fire, and overusing its        |   |   |
|          | *fireball breath* can cause the wings to gutter  |   |   |
|          | and fade.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Healed by fire:* The first time each battle the |   |   |
|          | flamewing is hit by a fire attack, instead of    |   |   |
|          | taking the fire damage it heals that many hit    |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tail whip:* The dragonic deals 2d12 extra       |   |   |
|          | damage to a target it misses with a melee        |   |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Lammasu

*Flight:* All lammasu fly. Warrior lammasu fly with upright dignity,
sometimes a bit slower than is wise. Fallen lammasu fly well enough to
keep up with all but the quickest demons. Lammasu wizards and priests
fly more gracefully than the warriors, but only because they're less
eager to run into things.

*Minor servitors:* When a lammasu isn't in combat or resting in
stone-form, it's usually surrounded by a fawning retinue of spirit
servants. The servants look like people from ages the world no longer
remembers. They stick close to the lammasu, seldom or never speak, and
in truth may be a projection of the lammasu's spirit or will. The
spirits are no use in combat, but they can manipulate small objects such
as combs and scented perfumes to use upon the lammasu's beard, hair, and
jewelry.

*Stone rest:* Outside the overworld, lammasu who wish to rest can
transform themselves into solid stone. A lammasu can see and hear as if
it were still made of flesh. It can change back to flesh as a free
action, but must wait a day before returning to stone, which is no great
delay for lammasu guardians whose positions extend for decades or
centuries. Considering that many sculptors carve stone lammasu to place
in front of or within important structures, it's deliberately difficult
for a thief or assassin to know whether he is facing a stone statue or a
transformed beast.

Note that this form of solid stone is different from the living stone
form sometimes adopted by the lammasu warrior, wizard, and priest during
battle.

#### Fallen Lammasu

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Fiery hoof +12 vs. AC**---30 damage            | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 20 ongoing  | * | 6 |
| Wrecker  | fire damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Beast    | *Natural odd hit:* The fallen lammasu can make a | * | 1 |
|          | second *fiery hoof* attack (but not a third) as  | * |   |
|          | a free action.                                   | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | **R: Rain of hellfire +11 vs. PD (1d4 random     | * | 5 |
|          | nearby creatures)**---20 fire damage             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit against an ally:* The target   | * |   |
|          | takes 10 ongoing fire damage instead of 20 fire  | * |   |
|          | damage, and until that ally saves against that   | M |   |
|          | damage, it adds the escalation die to its        | D |   |
|          | attacks.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit against an enemy:* The target  |   |   |
|          | also takes 15 ongoing fire damage.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Blessing of hellfire:* When the fallen lammasu  | H |   |
|          | fails a save against an effect created by an     | P |   |
|          | enemy, each enemy engaged with it takes 3d10     | * |   |
|          | fire damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Curse of the fallen:* The lammasu gains an      |   |   |
|          | *Abyssal curse* attack.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Abyssal curse +12 vs. MD (one nearby        |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---The target takes 10 ongoing negative  |   |   |
|          | energy damage each time the fallen lammasu hits  |   |   |
|          | it with an attack (hard save ends, 16+)          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* When the escalation die is odd,   |   |   |
|          | as a quick action (once per round).              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *The fire that burns:* When the fallen lammasu   |   |   |
|          | makes an attack that deals fire damage and the   |   |   |
|          | attack roll beats the target's fire resistance,  |   |   |
|          | the target loses its fire resistance until the   |   |   |
|          | end of the battle.                               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lammasu Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Hooves +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---28 damage,   | A |   |
| level    | and lammasu can pop free from the target         | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Troop    | *Natural even hit or miss while the warrior is   | * |   |
|          | staggered:* The target is hampered (save ends).  |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 7 |
|          | **Roaring impact +12 vs. PD**---35 damage, and   | * |   |
|          | 1d4 nearby enemies each take 2d10 thunder damage | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 1d4 nearby enemies each take 2d6 thunder | * | 0 |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The lammasu warrior can make this | * |   |
|          | attack only when it starts its turn flying and   | * |   |
|          | unengaged. It engages the target as it lands and | M |   |
|          | ends its turn on the ground.                     | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Refuge of stone:* When the lammasu fails a      | * |   |
|          | save, it becomes a creature of living stone      |   |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn. While made of    | * |   |
|          | living stone, the lammasu warrior gains *resist  | * |   |
|          | damage 16+* to all attacks against AC and PD. If | H |   |
|          | it's flying when it becomes living stone, its    | P |   |
|          | magic allows it to remain in the air if it       | * |   |
|          | wishes.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *On the crusade:* When an enemy misses the       |   |   |
|          | lammasu warrior with a melee attack, that enemy  |   |   |
|          | takes 2d10 damage.                               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lammasu Wizard

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 8th    | **Disdainful hoof +12 vs. AC**---60 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **R: Perfect energy sphere +13 vs. PD (1d3       | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---40     | * |   |
|          | damage of an energy type of the lammasu's        |   | 2 |
| Beast    | choice: cold, fire, lightning, or thunder        | * | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target can't cast spells      | P | 2 |
|          | (easy save ends, 6+).                            | D | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | **C: Superior words of power +13 vs. MD (one     | * |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemy)**---65 psychic damage   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* One spell or effect created  | * |   |
|          | by the target this battle is canceled (lammasu's | M |   |
|          | choice).                                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Master wizard's       | * |   |
|          | rejoinder +12 vs. MD (one enemy                  |   |   |
|          | spellcaster)**---30 damage, the triggering       | * |   |
|          | attack misses and has no effect against the      | * |   |
|          | lammasu wizard, and the target is hampered (save | H |   |
|          | ends)                                            | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as an interrupt action   | * |   |
|          | when an enemy attacks the lammasu wizard with a  |   |   |
|          | spell and rolls a natural odd attack roll.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Refuge of stone:* When the lammasu fails a      |   |   |
|          | save, it becomes a creature of living stone      |   |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn. While made of    |   |   |
|          | living stone, the lammasu wizard gains *resist   |   |   |
|          | damage 16+* to all attacks against AC and PD. If |   |   |
|          | it's flying when it becomes living stone, its    |   |   |
|          | magic allows it to remain in the air if it       |   |   |
|          | wishes.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lammasu Priest

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Hooves of command +14 vs. AC (2                | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---40 damage, and the target can't     | C | 1 |
|          | attack the lammasu priest until the end of its   | * | 7 |
| Caster   | next turn                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Beast    | **R: Righteous ray of faith +13 vs. PD (one      | * | 3 |
|          | nearby or faraway enemy)**---80 holy damage      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The lammasu priest can make a     | D | 3 |
|          | *righteous ray of faith* attack against a        | * | 0 |
|          | different target.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Judgment of the lammasu +14 vs. MD (each    | * |   |
|          | nearby conscious enemy that's staggered)**---50  | * |   |
|          | holy damage                                      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Invocation of the world unseen:* Once per       | * |   |
|          | battle, the lammasu priest can make this         | H |   |
|          | invocation as a quick action. At the start of    | P |   |
|          | each of the lammasu priest's turns until the     | * |   |
|          | roll succeeds, roll a d4. If the roll is less    | * |   |
|          | than or equal to the escalation die, each nearby |   |   |
|          | enemy is hampered (easy save ends, 6+).          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Invocation of the highest court:* Once per      |   |   |
|          | battle, the lammasu priest can make this         |   |   |
|          | invocation as a quick action if it has used      |   |   |
|          | *invocation of the world unseen*. At the start   |   |   |
|          | of each of the lammasu priest's turns, roll a    |   |   |
|          | d8. If the roll is less than or equal to the     |   |   |
|          | escalation die, the lammasu can make an          |   |   |
|          | *overworld's rebuke* attack as a free action     |   |   |
|          | that turn.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Overworld's rebuke    |   |   |
|          | +13 vs. PD (one nearby enemy)**---25 holy or     |   |   |
|          | lightning damage, and the target can't move to   |   |   |
|          | engage an enemy until the end of its next turn   |   |   |
|          | (it can move if it doesn't engage)               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Half damage.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Refuge of stone:* When the lammasu fails a      |   |   |
|          | save, it becomes a creature of living stone      |   |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn. While made of    |   |   |
|          | living stone, the lammasu priest gains *resist   |   |   |
|          | damage 16+* to all attacks against AC and PD. If |   |   |
|          | it's flying when it becomes living stone, its    |   |   |
|          | magic allows it to remain in the air if it       |   |   |
|          | wishes.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Lich

#### Lich Baroness

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Crystal scepter +9 vs. AC**---12 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is dazed (save     | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | **R: Soul blast +9 vs. PD**---10 negative energy  | * | 8 |
|           | damage, and 5 ongoing psychic damage (hard save   | * |   |
|           | ends, 16+)                                        | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | **C: Shroud of souls +9 vs. MD (each enemy        | * |   |
|           | engaged with it)**---5 psychic damage, and the    | * |   |
|           | target takes 10 psychic damage each time it       |   |   |
|           | attacks the baroness (save ends)                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *I drink your death save:* When the lich baroness | M |   |
|           | scores a critical hit, the target loses a death   | D |   |
|           | save until the end of the battle (effectively, it | * |   |
|           | now dies after failing three death saves, and the | * |   |
|           | effect is cumulative). In addition, the crit      |   |   |
|           | range of attacks by the lich against the target   | * |   |
|           | expands by the escalation die.                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Immortality:* When the lich drops to 0 hit       | P |   |
|           | points, it crumbles to dust but does not die. It  | * |   |
|           | begins to reform near its phylactery, taking a    | * |   |
|           | number of days to regain its full strength equal  |   |   |
|           | to its level. If the phylactery has been          |   |   |
|           | destroyed, the lich dies when it drops to 0 hit   |   |   |
|           | points.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lich Count

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Touch of the grave +13 vs. AC**---50 cold      | A |   |
| level    | damage, and the target is dazed (hard save ends, | C | 1 |
|          | 16+)                                             | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is weakened       |   | 2 |
| Undead   | instead of dazed (hard save ends, 16+)           | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 25 cold damage.                          | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | **R: Shadow rays +12 vs. PD (2 attacks)**---35   | * | 0 |
|          | negative energy damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is encased in shadows  | * |   |
|          | (save ends). While under the effect, it's        | * |   |
|          | weakened and takes 10 ongoing cold damage.       | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **R: Empowered fireball +12 vs. PD (1d3 + 1      | * |   |
|          | nearby creatures in a group)**---35 fire damage, | * |   |
|          | and 10 ongoing fire damage                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 20 ongoing  | * |   |
|          | fire damage instead of 10.                       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 fire damage, and 5 ongoing fire       | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Thank you for the best ten years of your life:* |   |   |
|          | When the lich count scores a critical hit, the   |   |   |
|          | target loses a death save until the end of the   |   |   |
|          | battle (effectively, it now dies after failing   |   |   |
|          | three death saves, and the effect is             |   |   |
|          | cumulative). In addition, the crit range of      |   |   |
|          | attacks by the lich against the target expands   |   |   |
|          | by the escalation die and the lich heals 40 hit  |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Immortality:* When the lich drops to 0 hit      |   |   |
|          | points, it crumbles to dust but does not die. It |   |   |
|          | begins to reform near its phylactery, taking a   |   |   |
|          | number of days to regain its full strength equal |   |   |
|          | to its level. If the phylactery has been         |   |   |
|          | destroyed, the lich dies when it drops to 0 hit  |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Look upon your doom +13 vs. MD (up to 3     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---The lich gains a *fear* aura |   |   |
|          | against the target until the end of the battle   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | if the target has 48 hp or fewer, it's dazed     |   |   |
|          | (--4 attack) and does not add the escalation die |   |   |
|          | to its attacks.                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Lich Prince

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Draining bone rod +17 vs. AC**---40 damage, 60 | A |   |
| level    | negative energy damage, and the target is dazed  | C | 2 |
|          | (hard save ends, 16+)                            | * | 4 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is weakened       |   | 2 |
| Undead   | instead of dazed (hard save ends, 16+).          | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 40 damage.                               | P | 6 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | **R: Arcane blast +16 vs. PD (up to 3 nearby or  | * | 0 |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---50 force damage, | * |   |
|          | and the target must roll a normal save; on a     |   |   |
|          | failure, it loses its next move action           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Each enemy engaged   | M |   |
|          | with the lich prince pops free from it as a      | D |   |
|          | bubble of arcane energy pushes them away.        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Soul rend +17 vs. PD (each nearby           |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---30 negative energy damage, and        | * |   |
|          | ghostly hands reach up from the ground and grab  | * |   |
|          | the target (as they try to pull the target's     | H |   |
|          | spirit out of its body)                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ghostly grasping hands:* When a creature is     | * |   |
|          | being grabbed by the ghostly hands, it takes 30  |   |   |
|          | negative energy damage at the start of its turn  |   |   |
|          | and must make a last gasp save. On the fourth    |   |   |
|          | failed last gasp save, the creature's soul is    |   |   |
|          | torn from it and it dies. Unconscious creatures  |   |   |
|          | take a --4 penalty to their last gasp saves.     |   |   |
|          | Note, grabbed creatures take a --5 penalty to    |   |   |
|          | disengage checks.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Blink and you missed it:* Once per battle when  |   |   |
|          | an attack would hit the lich prince, the attack  |   |   |
|          | misses instead and the lich teleports to a       |   |   |
|          | nearby location it can see as a free action.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Heartstopper:* When the lich prince scores a    |   |   |
|          | critical hit, if after taking damage the target  |   |   |
|          | still has hit points, it drops to 0 hp, falls    |   |   |
|          | unconscious, and begins making death saves. When |   |   |
|          | the target saves against this effect, it regains |   |   |
|          | hit points equal to the amount it had before     |   |   |
|          | dropping to 0 hp (after the crit damage). In     |   |   |
|          | addition, the crit range of attacks by the lich  |   |   |
|          | against the target expands by an amount equal to |   |   |
|          | the escalation die and the lich heals 60 hit     |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Immortality:* When the lich drops to 0 hit      |   |   |
|          | points, it crumbles to dust but does not die. It |   |   |
|          | begins to reform near its phylactery, taking a   |   |   |
|          | number of days to regain its full strength equal |   |   |
|          | to its level. If the phylactery has been         |   |   |
|          | destroyed, the lich dies when it drops to 0 hit  |   |   |
|          | points.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Look upon your doom +17 vs. MD (each enemy  |   |   |
|          | engaged with the lich's allies)**---The lich     |   |   |
|          | gains a *fear* aura against the target until the |   |   |
|          | end of the battle                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | if the target has 120 hp or fewer, it's dazed    |   |   |
|          | (--4 attack) and does not add the escalation die |   |   |
|          | to its attacks.                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Lizardman

#### Lizardman Savage

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Stone-tip spear (or club) +7 vs. AC**---7       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Wrecker   | *Natural 16+:* The lizardman savage can make a    | * |   |
|           | *bite* attack against the target or another       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | creature engaged with it as a free action.        | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Bite +7 vs. AC**---5      | P | 3 |
|           | damage, and the lizardman savage can make a       | D | 2 |
|           | *ripping frenzy* attack against the target as a   | * |   |
|           | standard action during its next turn if it's      | * |   |
|           | engaged with that target                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Ripping frenzy +9 vs. AC  | * |   |
|           | (3 attacks)**---5 damage                          | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | **R: Thrown spear +6 vs. AC**---5 damage          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Manticore

#### Manticore Bard

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Battering paws +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---18   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Caster   | *Natural 16+:* The manticore can make a single   | * |   |
|          | *volley of tail spikes* attack (one attack roll) |   | 1 |
| Beast    | against a different target as a free action      | * | 5 |
|          | without taking an opportunity attack.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **Crushing leonine jaws +10 vs. AC**---30        | D | 5 |
|          | damage, or 40 damage against a creature taking   | * | 0 |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Musical voice +13 vs. MD (1d3 nearby        | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---20 psychic damage, and the target   | * |   |
|          | is dazed (hard save ends, 16+)                   | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* In addition, the target can't use | * |   |
|          | the escalation die until it saves.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intermittent song:* The manticore can use       | * |   |
|          | *musical voice* only 1d4 times during the        | * |   |
|          | battle, and never two turns in a row.            | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | **R: Volley of tail spikes +11 vs. AC (1d3       | * |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---5      | * |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage (hard save ends, 16+)      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Poison reservoirs:* Each time the manticore     |   |   |
|          | uses its *volley of tail spikes* attack, it      |   |   |
|          | takes 1d6 damage, or 2d6 damage if it's          |   |   |
|          | staggered.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Battle music:* The manticore has songs for many |   |   |
|          | different purposes. When the manticore makes a   |   |   |
|          | *musical voice* attack and rolls a natural even  |   |   |
|          | hit, choose one song (or roll a d4):             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *1: Fortissimo*---Each of the manticore's allies |   |   |
|          | gains a +2d6 damage bonus with attacks that hit  |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle (non-cumulative).    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *2: Profundo*---The manticore's *musical voice*  |   |   |
|          | attack now deals 40 psychic damage instead of 20 |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *3: Furioso*---The target is confused instead of |   |   |
|          | dazed.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *4: Largo*---The manticore can make a *musical   |   |   |
|          | voice* attack during its next turn as a free     |   |   |
|          | action, but with a +3 attack bonus. This free    |   |   |
|          | attack won't trigger another *battle music*      |   |   |
|          | effect.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Mantikumhar

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 5th    | **Pincer claws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---18     | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 16+:* The mantikumhar pulls its target  | * |   |
|          | under the soil/ground. The target is stuck,      |   | 1 |
| Beast    | hampered, and takes 5 ongoing damage from        | * | 5 |
|          | suffocation (save ends all).                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* The target must roll an immediate save;  | D | 1 |
|          | on a failure, it's dazed until the end of its    | * | 9 |
|          | next turn from dirt or sand thrown in its face.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Crushing leonine jaws +10 vs. AC**---30        | * |   |
|          | damage, or 40 damage against a creature taking   | * |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | **C: Serpent sting +12 vs. AC**---10 damage, and | * |   |
|          | 5 ongoing poison damage (hard save ends, 16+)    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Burrowing:* The mantikumhar can move rapidly    | * |   |
|          | through sand, loose soil, or dry eroded earth.   | * |   |
|          | It prefers to dig out a wide pit and lie in wait | H |   |
|          | for prey. (See Burrowing.)                       | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Can't be blinded:* Between nictitating          | * |   |
|          | membranes that keep its eyes from being          |   |   |
|          | scratched out by the sand and its weird          |   |   |
|          | burrowing echolocation sense, the mantikumhar    |   |   |
|          | can't be blinded.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Poison reservoirs:* Each time the mantikumhar   |   |   |
|          | uses its *serpent sting* attack, it takes 1d6    |   |   |
|          | damage, or 2d6 damage if it's staggered.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Hunker down:* A mantikumhar can burrow into the |   |   |
|          | soil as a move action, concealing itself from    |   |   |
|          | attacks. A hunkered mantikumhar gains a +3 bonus |   |   |
|          | to AC and PD, but it can't use *crushing leonine |   |   |
|          | jaws*.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Sand ambush:* The mantikumhar's extensible tail |   |   |
|          | can strike by surprise like a cobra from         |   |   |
|          | anywhere in its pit.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Serpent sting +15 vs. AC (one nearby        |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---10 damage, and 5 ongoing poison       |   |   |
|          | damage (hard save ends, 16+)                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Coursing Manticore

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 6th    | **Battering paws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---20   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 16+:* The manticore can make a scorpion | * |   |
|          | sting attack against a different target as a     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | free action.                                     | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Crushing leonine jaws +11 vs. AC**---30        | P | 1 |
|          | damage, or 50 damage against a creature taking   | D | 7 |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Scorpion sting +13 vs. AC**---10 damage,    |   |   |
|          | and 5 ongoing poison damage (hard save ends,     | * |   |
|          | 16+)                                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Fly-by attack:* While flying, the manticore can | D |   |
|          | make a *scorpion sting* attack, pop free from    | * |   |
|          | the target, and keep flying to somewhere nearby. | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Giant batlike dragon wings put the     | * |   |
|          | final horrid touch on the coursing manticore's   | * |   |
|          | "everything awful" design aesthetic.             | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Poison reservoirs:* Each time the manticore     | * |   |
|          | uses its *scorpion sting* attack, it takes 1d6   | * |   |
|          | damage, or 2d6 damage if it's staggered.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Aerial archer:* Instead of a scorpion tail, the |   |   |
|          | manticore has a spiked tail full of quills and   |   |   |
|          | can make *volley of tail spikes* attacks instead |   |   |
|          | of *scorpion sting* attacks.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Volley of tail spikes +13 vs. AC (1d3       |   |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---5      |   |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage (hard save ends, 16+)      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Diving leap:* The manticore leaps toward its    |   |   |
|          | prey, using its wings to arrow into battle at    |   |   |
|          | tremendous speed. During its first turn only,    |   |   |
|          | add +6 to its initiative count. After that, the  |   |   |
|          | beast returns to its normal initiative order.    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Manticore

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Battering paws +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---20   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Archer   | *Natural 16+:* The manticore can make a single   | * |   |
|          | *volley of tail spikes* attack (one attack roll) |   | 1 |
| Beast    | against a different target as a free action.     | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Crushing leonine jaws +11 vs. AC**---30        | P | 1 |
|          | damage; OR 50 damage against a creature taking   | D | 8 |
|          | ongoing poison damage                            | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Volley of tail spikes +13 vs. AC (1d3       |   |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies in a group)**---5      | * |   |
|          | ongoing poison damage (hard save ends, 16+)      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.       | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Poison reservoirs:* Each time the manticore     | * |   |
|          | uses its *volley of tail spikes* attack, it      |   |   |
|          | takes 1d6 damage, or 2d6 damage if it is         | * |   |
|          | staggered.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Medusa

#### Medusa Outlaw

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Snakes and daggers +11 vs. AC (2               | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---10 damage, and 10 ongoing poison    | C | 1 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 6 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The medusa can make a *petrifying |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | gaze* attack against the target as a free        | * | 0 |
|          | action.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Poison arrow +11 vs. AC (one nearby or      | D | 5 |
|          | faraway enemy)**---15 damage, and 10 ongoing     | * | 0 |
|          | poison damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 20:* The medusa can make a *petrifying  | * |   |
|          | gaze* attack against the target as a free        | * |   |
|          | action.                                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Petrifying gaze +11   | * |   |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy)**---20 psychic damage, and    | * |   |
|          | the target must start making last gasp saves as  |   |   |
|          | it turns to stone                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Caught by an eye:* Whenever a nearby enemy      | H |   |
|          | attacks the medusa outlaw and rolls a natural 1  | P |   |
|          | or 2, the medusa can make a *petrifying gaze*    | * |   |
|          | attack against that attacker as a free action.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Escalating threat:* At the start of each of the |   |   |
|          | medusa's turns, roll a d4. If you roll less than |   |   |
|          | or equal to the escalation die, the medusa can   |   |   |
|          | also use *petrifying gaze* as a quick action     |   |   |
|          | once during that turn.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Medusa Noble

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 11th   | **Snakes and swords +17 vs. AC (3                | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---30 damage, and 15 ongoing poison    | C | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 1 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The medusa can make a *petrifying |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | gaze* attack against the target as a free        | * | 5 |
|          | action.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 5 |
|          | **R: Lightning fork +17 vs. PD (one nearby or    | D | 0 |
|          | faraway enemy)**---80 lightning damage           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The medusa deals 1d6  |   |   |
|          | × 10 lightning damage to all nearby enemies.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The medusa can make  | M |   |
|          | a *lightning fork* attack against a different    | D |   |
|          | target as a free action; keep making *lightning  | * |   |
|          | fork* attacks until you run out of targets that  | * |   |
|          | have taken damage from *lightning fork* or roll  |   |   |
|          | a natural odd attack.                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Petrifying gaze +17   | H |   |
|          | vs. MD (one enemy)**---70 psychic damage, and    | P |   |
|          | the target must start making last gasp saves as  | * |   |
|          | it turns to stone                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Caught by an eye:* Whenever a nearby enemy      |   |   |
|          | attacks the medusa noble and rolls a natural     |   |   |
|          | 1--5, the medusa can make a *petrifying gaze*    |   |   |
|          | attack against that attacker as a free action.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Serpent wardings:* Thrice per battle, as a free |   |   |
|          | action, the medusa noble can force an enemy to   |   |   |
|          | reroll a spell attack that targeted it. The      |   |   |
|          | attacker can't use the escalation die for the    |   |   |
|          | reroll.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Skilled sorcerer:* If lightning isn't working   |   |   |
|          | against her target, the medusa noble can take a  |   |   |
|          | --2 attack penalty to change the energy type of  |   |   |
|          | her ranged attack to fire or thunder.            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Minotaur

#### City Minotaur Guard

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Cestus and shortsword +9 vs. AC**---12 damage   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 8 damage.                    | * | 7 |
| Archer    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Repeating crossbow +9 vs. AC (1d4 nearby or  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | faraway enemies)**---16 damage if the target is   | * | 5 |
|           | nearby, 8 damage if the target is faraway         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Limited use:* Requires a standard action to      | D | 0 |
|           | reload, starts the battle loaded.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Sling +9 vs. AC (1 nearby or faraway         |   |   |
|           | enemy)**---12 damage                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Stand strong:* Once per battle when any minotaur | M |   |
|           | is popped free or is otherwise forced to move,    | D |   |
|           | all city minotaur guards can move into engagement | * |   |
|           | as an immediate free action.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Minotaur

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 4th     | **Axe or horns +9 vs. AC**---27 damage, and one   | A |   |
| level     | of the minotaur's allies can pop free from the    | C | 1 |
|           | target as a free action                           | * | 7 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Furious charge:* The attack instead deals 40     |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | damage on a hit if the minotaur first moves       | * | 3 |
|           | before attacking an enemy it was not engaged with | * |   |
|           | at the start of its turn.                         | P | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Blood frenzy:* Minotaurs gain a +4 melee attack  | * |   |
|           | bonus against staggered enemies.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Durable:* The first time each round the minotaur | M |   |
|           | takes damage, prevent 2d6 of it.                  | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fear:* While engaged with this creature, enemies | * |   |
|           | that have 24 hp or fewer are dazed (--4 attack)   |   |   |
|           | and do not add the escalation die to their        | * |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Minotaur Adept

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Horn or hand +9 vs. PD**---20 damage, and the  | A |   |
| level    | target pops free from the minotaur adept, is     | C | 1 |
|          | stuck, and takes 10 ongoing damage (save ends    | * | 9 |
| Caster   | all)                                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Natural even roll:* This attack only uses a     | * | 9 |
|          | quick action rather than a standard action.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Sun beams +11 vs. PD (1 or 2 nearby or      | D | 5 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---30 fire damage              | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Jagged spark +11 vs. PD (one nearby or      |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---36 lightning damage, or 50    | * |   |
|          | lightning damage against a creature that is      | * |   |
|          | flying                                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural move:* As a move action, the minotaur   | * |   |
|          | adept teleports somewhere nearby that it can     | * |   |
|          | see. Through the earth it looks like burrowing,  |   |   |
|          | through air like teleporting, etc.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1d3 times per battle.             | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Circle's strength:* The adept gains a bonus to  | * |   |
|          | saves equal to the escalation die.               | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Tribal Minotaur Berserker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Head-butt +10 vs. AC**---32 damage, or 40      | A |   |
| level    | damage if the minotaur has just moved into       | C | 1 |
|          | engagement with the target                       | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target becomes stunned   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | until the start of its next turn.                | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Stampede +10 vs. PD (1d4 nearby enemies, the   | P | 1 |
|          | minotaur can move between each attack as part of | D | 4 |
|          | the attack provided the enemies are sort of in a | * | 0 |
|          | line)**---27 damage, and target cannot make an   | * |   |
|          | opportunity attack against the minotaur this     |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Blood frenzy:* +4 bonus to attack staggered     | M |   |
|          | enemies.                                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Gore:* This minotaur does 10 miss damage.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Prey or predator:* The minotaur's crit range    | H |   |
|          | against staggered enemies expands by 2 (to 18+). | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Gladiator's brand:* The minotaur is a gladiator | * |   |
|          | (perhaps an escaped one), and gains +1 to its    |   |   |
|          | attacks against armed enemies (but not against   |   |   |
|          | magic-users).                                    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Mummy

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Unholy grasp +11 vs. PD**---40 ongoing         | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | negative energy damage and the target is         | * |   |
|          | affected by *mummy rot* (save ends both)         |   | 2 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *Each failed save (mummy rot):* The target's     | * |   |
|          | flesh begins to rot and the ongoing damage       | P | 3 |
|          | increases by +40 (cumulative). Saves granted by  | D | 5 |
|          | special powers don't increase this damage if     | * | 0 |
|          | they fail, only end of turn failures.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 20 damage.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Sepulchral glare +11 vs. MD (one nearby     | M |   |
|          | enemy)**---The target is hampered until the      | D |   |
|          | start of the mummy's next turn                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* If the target is already affected by     |   |   |
|          | *mummy rot*, increase the ongoing negative       | * |   |
|          | energy damage by 40. If the target isn't         | * |   |
|          | affected by *mummy rot* already, it takes 40     | H |   |
|          | ongoing negative energy damage and is affected   | P |   |
|          | by *mummy rot* (save ends both).                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mortal terror:* The presence of a mummy         |   |   |
|          | unnerves opponents, giving it an unusual *fear   |   |   |
|          | aura*. While engaged with this creature, enemies |   |   |
|          | that have 200 hp or fewer are dazed (--4 attack) |   |   |
|          | and do not add the escalation die to their       |   |   |
|          | attacks. Each time an enemy with 200 hp or fewer |   |   |
|          | attacks the mummy, hit or miss, it must roll a   |   |   |
|          | save. On a success, it's no longer affected by   |   |   |
|          | the *fear aura* effects of any mummy in the      |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spiritual grit:* When the mummy takes 20 damage |   |   |
|          | or less from a non-fire attack, it takes no      |   |   |
|          | damage instead.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Blessing of preservation:* The mummy has a +4   |   |   |
|          | bonus to all defenses until it takes damage.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bone-chilling cry:* Once per battle as a quick  |   |   |
|          | action, the mummy can issue a bone-chilling cry  |   |   |
|          | that seems to echo from some unseen tomb or      |   |   |
|          | portal and it makes a *call of the sarcophagus*  |   |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Call of the sarcophagus +11 vs. MD (each    |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy suffering *mummy rot*)**---The      |   |   |
|          | target is hampered until the end of its next     |   |   |
|          | turn                                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Naga

[Nastier Special for all naga:]{.underline}

Arcane balance: Whenever the naga rolls a natural 1--5 with an attack
roll, it can cancel one magical effect created by a spell or magic item
that is affecting the naga or a nearby creature (including beneficial
effect on a PC). It can be an ongoing effect, an effect that only lasts
a round, or even an effect that was supposed to last until the end of
the battle. Use your sense of what is magical and what isn't: a bard's
song is clearly magical, but a rogue's Shadow Walk talent probably
isn't, despite the wizard's arguments that it *should* be.

#### Swaysong Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Bite +10 vs. AC**---24 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 15 ongoing  | * | 6 |
| Leader   | poison damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* 12 damage.                               | * | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Song of reversals +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby or | P | 1 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---25 psychic damage           | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is confused (save      | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 psychic damage.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Hypnotic movements +10 vs. MD (one nearby   | * |   |
|          | enemy, or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die |   |   |
|          | if *mystic escalator* benefit is active)**---10  | * |   |
|          | psychic damage, and the target is hampered (save | * |   |
|          | ends)                                            | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* When an enemy targets the       | * |   |
|          | swaysong naga with a spell, the naga regains the | * |   |
|          | use of *song of reversals* if it's expended. In  |   |   |
|          | addition, if that spell is a recharge spell,     |   |   |
|          | roll its recharge check immediately after the    |   |   |
|          | spell is cast. If the spell is a per-battle or   |   |   |
|          | daily spell, roll a hard save (16+) immediately  |   |   |
|          | after the spell is cast; on a success, the       |   |   |
|          | spellcaster doesn't expend the spell.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mystic escalator:* The naga and each of its     |   |   |
|          | nearby allies can use the escalation die unless  |   |   |
|          | the naga has been targeted by an enemy's spell   |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sparkscale Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 6th    | **Bite +11 vs. AC**---30 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Each nearby enemy takes 10        | * | 0 |
| Leader   | thunder damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Bloom of lightning +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby   | P | 1 |
|          | or faraway enemies)**---30 lightning damage      | D | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Each nearby enemy takes 10        | * |   |
|          | thunder damage.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Each nearby creature (including allies)  | * |   |
|          | takes 5 thunder damage.                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Sparking aura +10 vs. PD (one nearby enemy, |   |   |
|          | or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die if     | * |   |
|          | *mystic escalator* benefit is active)**---20     | * |   |
|          | lightning damage, and the target is vulnerable   | H |   |
|          | (save ends)                                      | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* When an enemy targets the       | * |   |
|          | sparkscale naga with a spell, the naga regains   |   |   |
|          | the use of *sparking aura* if it's expended. In  |   |   |
|          | addition, if that spell is a recharge spell,     |   |   |
|          | roll its recharge check immediately after the    |   |   |
|          | spell is cast. If the spell is a per-battle or   |   |   |
|          | daily spell, roll a hard save (16+) immediately  |   |   |
|          | after the spell is cast; on a success, the       |   |   |
|          | spellcaster doesn't expend the spell.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mystic escalator:* The naga and each of its     |   |   |
|          | nearby allies can use the escalation die unless  |   |   |
|          | the naga has been targeted by an enemy's spell   |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Manafang Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Bite +12 vs. AC**---45 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The naga gains *resist spell      | * | 7 |
| Leader   | damage 16+* against the target's spells until    | * |   |
|          | the end of the battle.                           |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 25 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **R: Force missiles (1d4 nearby or faraway       | D | 1 |
|          | enemies)**---25 force damage                     | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Ritual movements +12 vs. MD (one nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemy, or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die | M |   |
|          | if *mystic escalator* benefit is active)**---40  | D |   |
|          | psychic damage, and the target can't cast spells | * |   |
|          | or use the activated powers of true magic items  | * |   |
|          | (save ends)                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* When an enemy targets the       | * |   |
|          | manafang naga with a spell, the naga regains the | H |   |
|          | use of *force missiles* if it's expended. In     | P |   |
|          | addition, if that spell is a recharge spell,     | * |   |
|          | roll its recharge check immediately after the    | * |   |
|          | spell is cast. If the spell is a per-battle or   |   |   |
|          | daily spell, roll a hard save (16+) immediately  |   |   |
|          | after the spell is cast; on a success, the       |   |   |
|          | spellcaster doesn't expend the spell.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mystic escalator:* The naga and each of its     |   |   |
|          | nearby allies can use the escalation die unless  |   |   |
|          | the naga has been targeted by an enemy's spell   |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Swaysong Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Bite +13 vs. AC**---24 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 15 ongoing  | * | 9 |
| Leader   | poison damage.                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* 12 damage.                               | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Song of reversals +13 vs. MD (1d3 nearby or | P | 1 |
|          | faraway enemies)**---25 psychic damage           | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is confused (save      | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 psychic damage.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Hypnotic movements +13 vs. MD (one nearby   | * |   |
|          | enemy, or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die |   |   |
|          | if *supreme mystic escalator* benefit is         | * |   |
|          | active)**---15 psychic damage, and the target is | * |   |
|          | hampered (save ends); until the target saves, it | H |   |
|          | takes 15 psychic damage each time it attacks the | P |   |
|          | naga                                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* Whenever an enemy targets the   |   |   |
|          | elder swaysong naga with a spell, the naga       |   |   |
|          | regains the use of *song of reversals* if it's   |   |   |
|          | expended. In addition, if that spell is a        |   |   |
|          | recharge spell, roll its recharge check          |   |   |
|          | immediately after the spell is cast. If the      |   |   |
|          | spell is a per-battle or daily spell, roll a     |   |   |
|          | hard save (16+) immediately after the spell is   |   |   |
|          | cast; on a success, the spellcaster doesn't      |   |   |
|          | expend the spell.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Supreme mystic escalator:* The naga and each of |   |   |
|          | its nearby allies can use the escalation die     |   |   |
|          | unless the naga has been hit by two enemy spells |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Sparkscale Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 9th    | **Bite +14 vs. AC**---30 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Each nearby enemy takes 10        | * | 3 |
| Leader   | thunder damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Bloom of lightning +14 vs. PD (1d3 nearby   | P | 1 |
|          | or faraway enemies)**---30 lightning damage      | D | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Each nearby enemy takes 10        | * |   |
|          | thunder damage.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Each nearby creature (including allies)  | * |   |
|          | takes 5 thunder damage.                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Sparking aura +14 vs. PD (one nearby enemy, |   |   |
|          | or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die if     | * |   |
|          | *supreme mystic escalator* benefit is            | * |   |
|          | active)**---40 lightning damage, and the target  | H |   |
|          | is vulnerable (save ends)                        | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* Whenever an enemy targets the   | * |   |
|          | elder sparkscale naga with a spell, the naga     |   |   |
|          | regains the use of *bloom of lightning* if it's  |   |   |
|          | expended. In addition, if that spell is a        |   |   |
|          | recharge spell, roll its recharge check          |   |   |
|          | immediately after the spell is cast. If the      |   |   |
|          | spell is a per-battle or daily spell, roll a     |   |   |
|          | hard save (16+) immediately after the spell is   |   |   |
|          | cast; on a success, the spellcaster doesn't      |   |   |
|          | expend the spell.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Supreme mystic escalator:* The naga and each of |   |   |
|          | its nearby allies can use the escalation die     |   |   |
|          | unless the naga has been hit by two enemy spells |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Manafang Naga

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | **Bite +15 vs. AC**---45 damage                  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The naga gains *resist spell      | * | 0 |
| Leader   | damage 16+* against the target's spells until    | * |   |
|          | the end of the battle.                           |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *Miss:* 25 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **R: Force missiles (1d4 nearby or faraway       | D | 1 |
|          | enemies)**---45 force damage                     | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Ritual movements +15 vs. MD (one nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemy, or one nearby enemy per point of esc. die | M |   |
|          | if *supreme mystic escalator* benefit is         | D |   |
|          | active)**---45 psychic damage, and the target    | * |   |
|          | can't cast spells or use the activated powers of | * |   |
|          | true magic items (save ends)                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 20 psychic damage.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Arcane mirror:* Whenever an enemy targets the   | P |   |
|          | elder manafang naga with a spell, the naga       | * |   |
|          | regains the use of *force missiles* if it's      | * |   |
|          | expended. In addition, if that spell is a        |   |   |
|          | recharge spell, roll its recharge check          |   |   |
|          | immediately after the spell is cast. If the      |   |   |
|          | spell is a per-battle or daily spell, roll a     |   |   |
|          | hard save (16+) immediately after the spell is   |   |   |
|          | cast; on a success, the spellcaster doesn't      |   |   |
|          | expend the spell.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Supreme mystic escalator:* The naga and each of |   |   |
|          | its nearby allies can use the escalation die     |   |   |
|          | unless the naga has been hit by two enemy spells |   |   |
|          | since its last turn.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Naiad

#### Kelplet

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +7 (keeps same initiative if created | * | 1 |
|          | by a dying kelpling)                             | * | 8 |
| 4th    |                                                  | A |   |
| level    | **Slimy scratch +11 vs. AC**---4 damage plus 2   | C | 1 |
|          | ongoing acid damage (normal save ends)           | * | 6 |
| Mook     |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Plant    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Kelpling

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 5th    | **Slashing fronds +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15  | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | *Miss:* 7 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Plant    | *Bladderwreck!:* The first time the kelpling is  | * | 6 |
|          | staggered during a fight, various bladders and   | * |   |
|          | blebs on its component symbionts rupture in      | P | 1 |
|          | self-defense, causing 4 acid damage plus 2       | D | 3 |
|          | ongoing acid damage to all nearby enemies        | * | 0 |
|          | (normal save ends). The kelpling can then        | * |   |
|          | perform its *stings a bit* attack as a free      |   |   |
|          | action on the creature it is engaged with.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Stings a bit +10 vs      | M |   |
|          | PD**---4 acid damage plus 5 ongoing acid damage  | D |   |
|          | (normal save ends)                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *The sum of its parts:* When the kelpling        | * |   |
|          | reaches 0 hp, it doesn't die. Instead, it        | H |   |
|          | separates into 1d3 + 1 constituent symbionts,    | P |   |
|          | known as kelplets.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Waterhorse

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Hoofbeating +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---19      | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | *Limited use:* Beast form only, but OK while     | * |   |
|          | hampered.                                        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | **Crushing grasp +11 vs. AC**---22 damage plus   | * |   |
|          | 10 ongoing damage (no save, ends when the victim | P | 1 |
|          | is no longer engaged with the water horse)       | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *Limited use:* Humanoid form only, but OK while  | * |   |
|          | hampered.                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: A truly wild ride +13 vs. MD (one nearby    | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---The victim is drawn to the waterhorse | M |   |
|          | in its black charger form and happily mounts the | D |   |
|          | beast (treat it as a teleport for simplicity's   | * |   |
|          | sake). Once they are astride, the waterhorse     | * |   |
|          | attempts to flee into the nearest body of water, |   |   |
|          | taking the rider with them. To prevent this, the | * |   |
|          | rider can attempt a DC 25 Strength-based control | * |   |
|          | check as a quick action (1d20 + level + Strength | H |   |
|          | modifier + any relevant background + escalation  | P |   |
|          | die). If they succeed, the rider gains control   | * |   |
|          | of the creature and can either dismount or steer | * |   |
|          | it to where they wish, potentially with a view   |   |   |
|          | to stealing its bridle on their next turn        |   |   |
|          | (requiring a successful attack roll with that    |   |   |
|          | specified aim). If the rider does not attempt to |   |   |
|          | steal the bridle on their next turn, they must   |   |   |
|          | make another DC 25 check to remain in control.   |   |   |
|          | Stealing the bridle turns the waterhorse into    |   |   |
|          | its humanoid form and throws the rider clear. If |   |   |
|          | the rider fails to control the creature at any   |   |   |
|          | point, it converts its next standard action to a |   |   |
|          | move action, using it and any other move actions |   |   |
|          | it may have to enter the water and trigger its   |   |   |
|          | watery grave attack 1 round later. The rider can |   |   |
|          | continue to make control checks until *watery    |   |   |
|          | grave* is activated.                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Beast form only, and only when    |   |   |
|          | the escalation die is 3+.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Watery grave**---Any     |   |   |
|          | creature not in control of the waterhorse is     |   |   |
|          | dragged beneath the surface of the lake. They no |   |   |
|          | longer make control checks and instead begin to  |   |   |
|          | make last gasp saves. If they accrue five        |   |   |
|          | failures, they drown. Their bones will make a    |   |   |
|          | nice addition to the pile, as soon as the        |   |   |
|          | waterhorse has finished gnawing on them.         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechanger:* As a standard action, the        |   |   |
|          | waterhorse can change between its true hairy     |   |   |
|          | humanoid appearance and its black charger        |   |   |
|          | disguise. A successful DC 25 skill check is      |   |   |
|          | required to see through the shapechange. If the  |   |   |
|          | waterhorse loses its bridle, it cannot change    |   |   |
|          | shape again until it recovers it. Blame the      |   |   |
|          | creature's lack of imagination for its limited   |   |   |
|          | forms.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Not the first rodeo:* The DC for a truly wild   |   |   |
|          | ride is now DC 30.                               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Melusine

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | **Cold, wet slap +10 vs. AC (2 attacks, or 1     | A |   |
| level    | attack if in humanoid form)**---24 damage, or 30 | C | 2 |
|          | damage vs. a confused target                     | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Dread wail +12 vs. MD (1d4 nearby           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | enemies)**---40 psychic damage                   | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is confused (save     | P | 1 |
|          | ends).                                           | D | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
|          | *Limited use:* Only in her true form when no     | * |   |
|          | enemy is confused.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* If in her true form, the melusine has  | * |   |
|          | limited flight capability, which she uses to     | M |   |
|          | effect an escape if sufficiently close to a      | D |   |
|          | convenient source of fresh water.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Invisibility:* The first time the melusine is   |   |   |
|          | staggered in battle, she becomes invisible and   | * |   |
|          | attempts to extricate herself from the fight.    | * |   |
|          | She remains invisible until she either attacks   | H |   |
|          | someone, or performs a flashy maneuver (such as  | P |   |
|          | regaining her true form and flying away).        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechanger:* As a standard action, the        |   |   |
|          | melusine can change her form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid or fish (the latter usually only if     |   |   |
|          | already in water), or turn back into her true    |   |   |
|          | form. A successful DC 25 skill check is required |   |   |
|          | to see through the shapechange.                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Nix

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Bop on, or straight through, the nose +13 vs.  | A |   |
| level    | AC**---30 damage                                 | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  | **C: Mellifluous music +13 vs. MD (one nearby    | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---20 psychic damage and the target is   |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | entranced and becomes confused (save ends).      | * | 0 |
|          | Often, instead of attacking their fellows, the   | * |   |
|          | hapless sap rushes to the creature's side,       | P | 1 |
|          | permitting the nix/nixie to use their what lies  | D | 6 |
|          | beneath attack on their next turn provided they  | * | 0 |
|          | are close to a suitable water source             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* Can only be used when the         | * |   |
|          | escalation die is even.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **What lies                | D |   |
|          | beneath**---Any creature drawn to the            | * |   |
|          | nix/nixie's side and still confused falls into   | * |   |
|          | the creature's arms and lets themselves be       |   |   |
|          | dragged under the water by their new paramour.   | * |   |
|          | They begin to make last gasp saves (in place of  | * |   |
|          | those for being confused), drowning when they    | H |   |
|          | reach their fifth failure.                       | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechanger:* As a standard action, the        | * |   |
|          | nix/nixie can change its form to that of any     |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or turn back into their true form. A   |   |   |
|          | successful DC 25 skill check is required to see  |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange. Whether or not the old  |   |   |
|          | wives' tale about nix/nixies always having wet   |   |   |
|          | hems is true in your game is up to you; but if   |   |   |
|          | it is, the DC check may be lowered to 20 as a    |   |   |
|          | result.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Nymph

[Standard powers for all nymphs]{.underline}

*Domain bound:* Nymphs are tied to an area of land or water. Land areas
will be at most a couple miles wide; water areas might be much larger.
As a rule, nymphs can't leave the area they're bound to.

*Limited immortality:* A nymph that drops to 0 hit points or is
otherwise slain will eventually return to life in its domain, so long as
its domain and its secret survives. After an hour, a nymph needs a hard
save to return to life. After eight hours, a nymph needs a normal save
to return to life. If the nymph has still not returned, roll an easy
save at the end of each 24 hours until the nymph succeeds.

*Note on types:* The following nymphs with the humanoid type probably
remember themselves. Nymphs that have probably forgotten their original
selves have the elemental type.

#### Wood Nymph (Dryad)

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Sharp wooden fingers +7 vs. AC**---12 damage    | * | 5 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Spiked acorn +6 vs. AC**---11 damage         |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | **C: Willowy words +7 vs. MD (1d2 nearby          | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---The target is confused (save ends)   | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The save is hard (16+) instead.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Environmental boost:* The dryad gains a +4 bonus |   |   |
|           | to the attack against targets that have consumed  | * |   |
|           | natural food or water within the dryad's domain   | * |   |
|           | within the last day.                              | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Tree stride:* As a move action, a dryad can      | * |   |
|           | enter any living tree within its domain it's      | * |   |
|           | touching and teleport to another tree within that |   |   |
|           | region. This movement doesn't provoke opportunity | * |   |
|           | attacks.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Call tree friends:* Before the start of the      | * |   |
|           | battle, the dryad summons 2d4 awakened trees that |   |   |
|           | fight with it.                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Entrancing beauty:* The dryad can appear as a    |   |   |
|           | beautiful wood elf. While speaking with creatures |   |   |
|           | outside of battle, the dryad can choose to add    |   |   |
|           | power to its words to try to charm those          |   |   |
|           | listening. Make a *willowy words* attack against  |   |   |
|           | each creature that can hear the dryad. On a hit,  |   |   |
|           | instead of being confused, the target is charmed  |   |   |
|           | (as per the charm person spell). It then          |   |   |
|           | considers the dryad a friend. Creatures missed by |   |   |
|           | the attack only notice the charm attempt if it    |   |   |
|           | misses by 4 or more. A dryad can attempt to charm |   |   |
|           | a creature only once per day.                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Woodland grace:* The dryad can take an extra     |   |   |
|           | standard action during its turn when the          |   |   |
|           | escalation die is even.                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### River Nymph (Naiad)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 3rd    | **Fist of water +8 vs. AC**---17 damage, and the | A |   |
| level    | target pops free from the naiad                  | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | **R: Skipped river stone +7 vs. AC**---12 damage | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | *Natural even hit or miss:* The attack targets   | * | 4 |
|          | another nearby enemy unless it's already         | * |   |
|          | targeted three enemies this way.                 | P | 8 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | **C: Watery words +8 vs. MD (one nearby          | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---The target is confused (save ends;    | * |   |
|          | see *the river's song* below)                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *The river's song:* When a creature is confused  | * |   |
|          | from the naiad's *watery words* attack, it       | M |   |
|          | immediately moves into the water next to the     | D |   |
|          | naiad as a free action to defend the naiad. The  | * |   |
|          | target takes half the damage of the next attack  | * |   |
|          | that hits the naiad. During its turn, it doesn't |   |   |
|          | attack, instead moving to stay next to the       | * |   |
|          | naiad. Each time the target fails its save, it   | * |   |
|          | will again defend the naiad against the next     | H |   |
|          | attack that hits it, taking half damage.         | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *One with the river:* A naiad can walk on the    | * |   |
|          | surface of water, making it seem shallow, and it |   |   |
|          | can swim through the water and breathe           |   |   |
|          | underwater with ease. Its enemies might have a   |   |   |
|          | more difficult time engaging it.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Naiad's cleansing:* Each time a target confused |   |   |
|          | by *watery words* fails its save, it will forget |   |   |
|          | something important. GM's choice or player's     |   |   |
|          | suggestion!                                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wild Dryad

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Branching clubs and flailing branches +8 vs.   | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | AC (1d4 attacks)**---15 damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | **C: Unexpected natural hazards +8 vs. PD (1d3   | * | 5 |
| lemental | nearby enemies)**---24 damage (representing      | * |   |
|          | things like bees erupting from underground       | P | 1 |
|          | hives, branches falling from other trees,        | D | 0 |
|          | cave-ins, and whatever else seems available in   | * | 0 |
|          | nature's arsenal)                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Environmental boost:* The dryad gains a +4      | M |   |
|          | bonus to attacks against targets that have       | D |   |
|          | consumed natural food or water within the        | * |   |
|          | dryad's domain within the last day.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Tree stride:* As a move action, a dryad can     | * |   |
|          | enter any living tree within its domain it's     | * |   |
|          | touching and teleport to another tree within     | H |   |
|          | that region. This movement doesn't provoke       | P |   |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Call tree friends:* Before the start of the     |   |   |
|          | battle, the dryad summons 2d4 awakened trees     |   |   |
|          | that fight with it.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Woodland grace:* The dryad can take an extra    |   |   |
|          | standard action during its turn when the         |   |   |
|          | escalation die is even.                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Hill Nymph (Oread)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 4th    | Vulnerability: thunder                           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Hardened fist +9 vs. AC**---25 damage          | * | 7 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 14+:* The target is stuck until the end |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | of its next turn as a stone hand rises from the  | * | 2 |
|          | ground to grasp it.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* As above, but save ends.          | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **C: Hard words +9 vs. MD (1d3 nearby            | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---20 psychic damage, and the target   |   |   |
|          | is overcome by the cold beauty and piercing      | * |   |
|          | words of the oread (save ends); while overcome,  | * |   |
|          | the target takes a penalty to all defenses equal | M |   |
|          | to the escalation die                            | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes the penalty | * |   |
|          | to attacks.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 psychic damage.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Earth's embrace:* Once per battle as a move     | * |   |
|          | action, the oread can pull one creature          |   |   |
|          | currently overcome by its *hard words* attack    |   |   |
|          | under the ground into an embrace with a part of  |   |   |
|          | its consciousness. The oread's physical form     |   |   |
|          | remains above ground and continues to battle.    |   |   |
|          | The target remains underground, taking no        |   |   |
|          | actions except to bond with the oread and        |   |   |
|          | telepathically reveal its secrets to the oread   |   |   |
|          | until it saves. While underground, it can't be   |   |   |
|          | seen or targeted by allies. Saving from being    |   |   |
|          | overcome releases the target from underground.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist weapon damage 12+:* When a weapon attack |   |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 12+ on the attack roll or it only deals  |   |   |
|          | half damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sea Nymph (Nereid)

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Coral claws +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---16      | * | 0 |
| Spoiler  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | **C: Rippling words +9 vs. MD (up to 2 nearby    | * | 6 |
|          | enemies)**---The target falls unconscious as it  | * |   |
|          | begins to slumber (save ends; an ally next to    | P | 1 |
|          | the target can also use a standard action to     | D | 3 |
|          | wake the target)                                 | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* When the escalation die is odd.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Call of the sea:* Twice per battle as a quick   | * |   |
|          | action (once per round), the nereid can call to  | M |   |
|          | a slumbering creature, and during its next turn  | D |   |
|          | (while still unconscious), that creature will    | * |   |
|          | swim under the water seeking the nereid. The     | * |   |
|          | creature must start making last gasp saves,      |   |   |
|          | which replace its save against being             | * |   |
|          | unconscious. After the fourth failure, it        | * |   |
|          | drowns.                                          | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Child of the sea:* The nereid can walk atop the | * |   |
|          | waves and move (and breathe) underwater without  | * |   |
|          | restraint. Its enemies might have a more         |   |   |
|          | difficult time engaging it.                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wild Naiad

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Fist of water +10 vs. AC**---32 damage, and    | A |   |
| level    | the target pops free from the naiad              | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Spoiler  | **R: Skipped river stone +9 vs. AC**---20 damage | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural even hit or miss:* The attack targets   | * | 6 |
| lemental | another nearby enemy unless it's already         | * |   |
|          | targeted three enemies this way.                 | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 3 |
|          | **C: Watery words +10 vs. MD (one nearby         | * | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---The target is confused (save ends;    | * |   |
|          | see *the river's song* below)                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | The river's song: When a creature is confused    | * |   |
|          | from the naiad's *watery words* attack, it       | M |   |
|          | immediately moves into the water next to the     | D |   |
|          | naiad as a free action to defend the naiad. The  | * |   |
|          | target takes half the damage of the next attack  | * |   |
|          | that hits the naiad. During its turn, it doesn't |   |   |
|          | attack, instead moving to stay next to the       | * |   |
|          | naiad. Each time the target fails its save, it   | * |   |
|          | will again defend the naiad against the next     | H |   |
|          | attack that hits it, taking half damage.         | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *One with the river:* A naiad can walk on the    | * |   |
|          | surface of water, making it seem shallow, and it |   |   |
|          | can swim through the water and breathe           |   |   |
|          | underwater with ease. Its enemies might have a   |   |   |
|          | more difficult time engaging it.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Naiad's cleansing:* Each time a target confused |   |   |
|          | by *watery words* fails its save, it will forget |   |   |
|          | something important. GM's choice or player's     |   |   |
|          | suggestion!                                      |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wild Oread

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: thunder                           | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Hardened fist +11 vs. AC**---38 damage         | * | 9 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 14+:* The target is stuck until the end |   | 1 |
| E        | of its next turn as a stone hand rises from the  | * | 4 |
| lemental | ground to grasp it.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* As above, but save ends.          | D | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Stoneflow:* As a move action once per round,    | * |   |
|          | the oread can sink into the ground and emerge    |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby. This movement doesn't provoke  | * |   |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist weapon damage 14+:* When a weapon attack | * |   |
|          | targets this creature, the attacker must roll a  |   |   |
|          | natural 14+ on the attack roll or it only deals  | * |   |
|          | half damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wild Nereid

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Coral claws +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25      | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | **R: Rising wave +12 vs. PD (1d3 nearby enemies  | * | 8 |
| lemental | in a group)**---24 damage, and the target loses  | * |   |
|          | its next move action                             | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Escalation die is 3+:* The attack targets 1d3 + | * | 0 |
|          | 1 nearby enemies in a group instead.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Child of the sea:* The nereid can walk atop the | * |   |
|          | waves and move (and breathe) underwater without  | * |   |
|          | restraint. Its enemies might have a more         | M |   |
|          | difficult time engaging it.                      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ogre

#### Ogre

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Big honkin' club +7 vs. AC**---18 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * | 6 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Big shove +9 vs. PD (each enemy engaged with    |   | 1 |
| Giant     | ogre)**---1d6 damage, and the target pops free    | * | 2 |
|           | from the ogre                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *Quick use:* This power only requires a quick     | D | 0 |
|           | action (once per round) instead of a standard     | * |   |
|           | action when the escalation die is even.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Tough skin:* Whenever the ogre takes weapon      | M |   |
|           | damage, reduce that damage by 1d8 points.         | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Penitent

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 3rd    | **Remorseful flail +6 vs. AC**---20 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* Until the end of the | * | 6 |
| Blocker  | battle, when an enemy engaged with the ogre      | * |   |
|          | attacks it, that enemy can't target other        |   | 1 |
| Giant    | enemies with that attack.                        | * | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage to a different nearby enemy. | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Closer my death to thee:* While staggered, the  | * | 0 |
|          | ogre penitent gains a +4 attack bonus.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Crumbling ego:* Each time the ogre fails a      | * |   |
|          | save, it takes 1d8 psychic damage.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Frenzied disappointment:* If the ogre penitent  | * |   |
|          | rolls a natural 1 or 2 with an attack roll, it   |   |   |
|          | can take an extra standard action during its     | * |   |
|          | next turn.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Demonic Ogre

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | **Demon-kissed blade +9 vs. AC**---24 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The ogre gains a     | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | random *demonic advantage* (see below) until the | * |   |
|          | end of the battle. All demonic advantages end if |   | 1 |
| Giant    | the ogre experiences a demonic eruption.         | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half-damage.                             | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | **R: Flaming spear +9 vs. AC**---20 damage       | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The target takes 10  |   |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Demonic advantage:* Roll a d6 to determine      | M |   |
|          | which demonic ability the ogre gains.            | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | 1: The ogre gains *resist energy 16+*.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 2: Once per battle, the ogre can teleport        | * |   |
|          | anywhere it can see as a move action.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | 3: The ogre's attacks deal +1d8 damage, hit or   | P |   |
|          | miss.                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | 4: At the start of the ogre's turn, each enemy   |   |   |
|          | engaged with it takes 2d6 negative energy        |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 5: The ogre gains a +5 bonus to saves this       |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | 6: The ogre begins making *demonic eruption*     |   |   |
|          | rolls when the escalation die is 4+ instead of   |   |   |
|          | 6+.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Demonic eruption:* When the escalation die is   |   |   |
|          | 6+, the demonic ogre rolls a normal save at the  |   |   |
|          | start of each of its turns. On a success, roll a |   |   |
|          | d6 and replace the demonic ogre with a new       |   |   |
|          | undamaged demon. 1--2: Imp; 3--4: Despoiler; 5:  |   |   |
|          | Frenzy demon; 6: Cambion sickle.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Early eruption:* Begin making *demonic          |   |   |
|          | eruption* rolls when the escalation die is 5+    |   |   |
|          | instead of 6+. Also use stronger demons for the  |   |   |
|          | options that the ogre could turn into.           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Berserker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Giant axe or sword +8 vs. AC**---28 damage     | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The ogre berserker   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | gains the *escalator* ability (it adds the       | * |   |
|          | escalation die to its attacks) until the end of  |   | 1 |
| Giant    | the battle.                                      | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage, and the ogre berserker      | P | 1 |
|          | takes 1d6 damage.                                | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *You shouldn't have done that:* When an enemy    | * |   |
|          | engaged with the berserker scores a critical hit |   |   |
|          | against it, that enemy takes 7d6 damage.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Incidental damage:* When an enemy makes an      | M |   |
|          | opportunity attack against the berserker, hit or | D |   |
|          | miss, that enemy takes 2d6 damage.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Rauguguggh:* Once per battle as a free action,  |   |   |
|          | when the ogre berserker fails a save, it can     | * |   |
|          | take 3d6 damage to succeed at the save instead.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Crusader

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 4th    | **Jagged greatsword or greataxe +10 vs. AC (2    | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---18 damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| Troop    | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The ogre crusader    | * |   |
|          | can make a *war-curse* attack as a free action.  |   | 1 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: War javelin +8 vs. AC**---18 damage         | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | **C: War-curse +10 vs. MD (the nearby conscious  | * |   |
|          | enemy with the lowest hit points)**---10 psychic |   |   |
|          | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Special hate:* When the ogre crusader attacks   | M |   |
|          | an enemy that has a positive or conflicted       | D |   |
|          | relationship with an icon that is aligned        | * |   |
|          | opposite to the Ogre's aligned icon, it adds the | * |   |
|          | escalation die to the attack roll.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Champion

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | **Champion's battle-axe +10 vs. AC**---30 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 5, 10, 15, or 20:* The ogre champion    | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | gains a second standard action this turn, but    | * |   |
|          | not a third.                                     |   | 1 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Heavy javelin +10 vs. AC (one nearby or     | D | 4 |
|          | faraway enemy)**---26 damage                     | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Racial enemies:* Whenever a nearby dwarf or elf | * |   |
|          | enemy attempts to use their racial power, they   | M |   |
|          | must roll a hard save (16+). On a failure, the   | D |   |
|          | power fails and has no effect that turn (but     | * |   |
|          | they can try again next turn).                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Slayer of wizards:* Creatures engaged with the  | * |   |
|          | ogre champion take opportunity attacks from it   | * |   |
|          | when casting close spells as if they were        | H |   |
|          | casting ranged spells.                           | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Escalating danger:* The ogre champion adds the  |   |   |
|          | escalation die to the damage it deals with its   |   |   |
|          | attacks, hit or miss.                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Minion

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 9th     | **Ogre-sized chopper +14 vs. AC**---35 damage     | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Miss:* Half damage.                              | * | 3 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Ogre-sized javelin +14 vs. AC (one nearby or |   | 1 |
| Giant     | faraway enemy)**---20 damage                      | * | 9 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Incidental damage:* When an enemy makes an       | P | 8 |
|           | opportunity attack against the ogre minion, hit   | D | 0 |
|           | or miss, that enemy takes 4d6 damage.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Double-strength mook:* The ogre minion mook      |   |   |
|           | counts as two 9th level mooks when you're       | * |   |
|           | building battles.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Punching above its weight:* Once per round, the  | * |   |
|           | ogre minion mob can take 5d10 damage to reroll an |   |   |
|           | attack (a member of the mob takes one for the     | * |   |
|           | team).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ogre Mage

#### Ogre Mage Knight

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Naginata +11 vs. AC**---The effect depends on  | A |   |
| level    | the roll.                                        | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit:* 25 damage, and the ogre mage | * |   |
|          | knight can use *lightning pulse* as a free       |   | 1 |
| Giant    | action.                                          | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* 20 damage, and the ogre mage  | P | 1 |
|          | knight can use *voice of thunder* as a free      | D | 6 |
|          | action.                                          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even miss:* 10 damage, and the ogre     |   |   |
|          | mage knight can teleport to any nearby location  | * |   |
|          | it can see before using *magi's lightning chain* | * |   |
|          | as a free action.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* The ogre mage knight can use | * |   |
|          | *cone of cold* as a free action.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **R: Magi's lightning chain +11 vs. PD**---15    | * |   |
|          | lightning damage, and each time this attack has  | * |   |
|          | a natural even attack roll, the ogre mage knight | H |   |
|          | can target a different creature with the ability | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Cone of cold +11 vs. PD (up to 3 nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemies in a group, also targets the ogre's      |   |   |
|          | allies engaged with the targets)**---20 cold     |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 cold damage.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Lightning pulse +11 vs. PD (one random      |   |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemy)**---20 lightning damage |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is weakened (save |   |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Voice of thunder +11 vs. PD (1d3 nearby     |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---15 thunder damage                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist exceptional attacks 16+:* When a limited |   |   |
|          | attack (not an at-will attack) targets this      |   |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+   |   |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Trollish regeneration 15:* While an ogre mage   |   |   |
|          | is damaged, its uncanny flesh heals 15 hit       |   |   |
|          | points at the start of the ogre mage's turn. It  |   |   |
|          | can regenerate five times per battle. If it      |   |   |
|          | heals to its maximum hit points, then that use   |   |   |
|          | of *regeneration* doesn't count against the      |   |   |
|          | five-use limit.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | When the ogre mage is hit by an attack that      |   |   |
|          | deals fire or acid damage, it loses one use of   |   |   |
|          | its *regeneration*, and it can't regenerate      |   |   |
|          | during its next turn.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Dropping an ogre mage to 0 hp doesn't kill it if |   |   |
|          | it has any uses of *regeneration* left.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ki:* Gain 1d4 ki at the start of each battle.   |   |   |
|          | Spend a point of ki as a free action, once per   |   |   |
|          | round, to change the ogre mage knight's natural  |   |   |
|          | attack result by one; a natural 1 could become a |   |   |
|          | 2, a natural 19 could become a natural 20, and   |   |   |
|          | so on.                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Mage

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Naginata +13 vs. AC**---35 damage              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* Make a second *naginata* attack   | * | 9 |
| Caster   | against a nearby enemy as a free action          | * |   |
|          | (engaging it is not required).                   |   | 2 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | **C: Cone of cold +13 vs. PD (up to 3 nearby     | * |   |
|          | enemies in a group)**---50 cold damage           | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/day, and the attack affects the | * | 0 |
|          | ogre's allies engaged with or between enemy      | * |   |
|          | targets.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aura of treachery:* Once per round when a       | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy misses the ogre mage with an        | M |   |
|          | attack, the ogre mage can make an *aura of       | D |   |
|          | treachery* attack against it as a free action.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Aura of treachery +13 |   |   |
|          | vs. MD**---The target is confused until the end  | * |   |
|          | of the ogre mage's next turn                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Flight:* The ogre mage flies using the sheer    | P |   |
|          | power of its superior mind.                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Invisibility:* If the ogre mage is not engaged, |   |   |
|          | it can turn invisible as an at-will standard     |   |   |
|          | action. It becomes visible when it attacks. The  |   |   |
|          | ogre mage takes 1d10 damage each time it uses    |   |   |
|          | invisibility while it's staggered.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist exceptional attacks 16+:* When a limited |   |   |
|          | attack (not an at-will attack) targets this      |   |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+   |   |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Trollish regeneration 20: While an ogre mage is  |   |   |
|          | damaged, its uncanny flesh heals 20 hit points   |   |   |
|          | at the start of the ogre mage's turn. It can     |   |   |
|          | regenerate five times per battle. If it heals to |   |   |
|          | its maximum hit points, then that use of         |   |   |
|          | *regeneration* doesn't count against the         |   |   |
|          | five-use limit.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | When the ogre mage is hit by an attack that      |   |   |
|          | deals fire or acid damage, it loses one use of   |   |   |
|          | its *regeneration*, and it can't regenerate      |   |   |
|          | during its next turn.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Dropping an ogre mage to 0 hp doesn't kill it if |   |   |
|          | it has any uses of *regeneration* left.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ogre Lightning Mage

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Naginata +14 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---40 damage  | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | * | 0 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Lightning from torn sky +14 vs. PD (up to 2 |   | 2 |
| Giant    | nearby enemies, plus one faraway enemy, if       | * | 2 |
|          | any)**---52 lightning damage                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, but the ogre lightning  | D | 3 |
|          | mage regains the use of this attack if it's      | * | 0 |
|          | expended each time it uses its *naginata*        | * |   |
|          | attack.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Past master's judgment +14 vs. MD (1d3      | * |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---25 psychic damage            | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *First natural even hit each attack:* The ogre   | * |   |
|          | lightning mage can cancel one spell or magical   | * |   |
|          | effect created by the target.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The ogre lightning mage flies well     | * |   |
|          | using the sheer power of its superior mind.      | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Invisibility:* While not engaged, the ogre      | * |   |
|          | lightning mage can turn invisible as an at-will  | * |   |
|          | standard action. It becomes visible when it      |   |   |
|          | attacks. The ogre mage takes 1d10 damage each    |   |   |
|          | time it uses *invisibility* while it's           |   |   |
|          | staggered.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist exceptional attacks 16+:* When a limited |   |   |
|          | attack (not an at-will attack) targets this      |   |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+   |   |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Trollish regeneration 20:* While an ogre mage   |   |   |
|          | is damaged, its uncanny flesh heals 20 hit       |   |   |
|          | points at the start of the ogre mage's turn. It  |   |   |
|          | can regenerate five times per battle. If it      |   |   |
|          | heals to its maximum hit points, then that use   |   |   |
|          | of *regeneration* doesn't count against the      |   |   |
|          | five-use limit.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | When the ogre mage is hit by an attack that      |   |   |
|          | deals fire or acid damage, it loses one use of   |   |   |
|          | its *regeneration*, and it can't regenerate      |   |   |
|          | during its next turn.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | Dropping an ogre mage to 0 hp doesn't kill it if |   |   |
|          | it has any uses of *regeneration* left.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Prismatic Ogre Mage

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Horns and claws +15 vs. AC**---75 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 2--5:* The prismatic ogre mage can use  | * | 2 |
| Caster   | *prismatic blast* as a free action without       | * |   |
|          | provoking an opportunity attack.                 |   | 1 |
| Giant    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | **Force shove +15 vs. PD (each enemy engaged     | * |   |
|          | with ogre)**---10 force damage, and the target   | P | 3 |
|          | pops free from the ogre mage                     | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Quick use:* This power only requires a quick    | * |   |
|          | action (once per round) instead of a standard    |   |   |
|          | action when the escalation die is odd.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Prismatic blast +15 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or   | M |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---Roll a d8        | D |   |
|          | against each hit target to determine the type of | * |   |
|          | ray and effect                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *1. Red:* 75 fire damage; *Miss:* 40 fire        | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *2. Orange:* 50 damage, and the target is        | P |   |
|          | confused (save ends).                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *3. Yellow:* 40 ongoing poison damage.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *4. Green:* The target loses a recovery, and the |   |   |
|          | prismatic ogre mage heals 70 hp.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *5. Blue:* 60 lightning damage, and make a       |   |   |
|          | secondary attack:                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **+15 vs. PD (one enemy near the target)**---20  |   |   |
|          | lightning damage.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *6. Cyan:* The target is stunned (save ends).    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *7. Purple:* The target is dazed and confused    |   |   |
|          | (save ends both). When the target saves, it      |   |   |
|          | takes 40 psychic damage.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *8. Magenta:* The target is transported into the |   |   |
|          | future. Remove that creature from play,          |   |   |
|          | returning it to the battle in (or near) its      |   |   |
|          | previous location at the end of its next turn.   |   |   |
|          | No time seems to pass for the target while it's  |   |   |
|          | gone.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist exceptional attacks 16+:* When a limited |   |   |
|          | attack (not an at-will attack) targets this      |   |   |
|          | creature, the attacker must roll a natural 16+   |   |   |
|          | on the attack roll or it only deals half damage. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Warp:* The prismatic ogre mage warps reality    |   |   |
|          | with its presence. Each character hit by the     |   |   |
|          | *prismatic blast* attack during battle must      |   |   |
|          | write down one true personal trait or preference |   |   |
|          | about their character such as: "Yellow hair",    |   |   |
|          | "Afraid of spiders", "Prefers white wine to      |   |   |
|          | red", or "Tattoo of a halfling on left bicep".   |   |   |
|          | These personal traits are shuffled and randomly  |   |   |
|          | distributed equally by the GM after the battle   |   |   |
|          | is over. Whichever trait each player receives is |   |   |
|          | now true for their character as well as for the  |   |   |
|          | character of the player who wrote it down        |   |   |
|          | (unless there has somehow turned out to be a     |   |   |
|          | swap...). These traits don't alter game          |   |   |
|          | mechanics (feats, powers, backgrounds, icon      |   |   |
|          | relationships, attributes, bonuses, etc.). They  |   |   |
|          | are personal details that have been warped and   |   |   |
|          | scrambled by the prismatic ogre mage's magic.    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Ooze

All oozes have the following two abilities:

*Flows where it likes:* The ooze is immune to opportunity attacks.

*Ooze:* The ooze is immune to effects. When an attack applies a
condition to an ooze (dazed, hampered, weakened, ongoing damage, etc.),
that condition doesn't affect it.

#### Ochre Jelly

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **C: Acid-drenched pseudopod +8 vs. PD (1d4       | A |   |
| level     | attacks, each against a different nearby          | C | 1 |
|           | enemy)**---6 acid damage                          | * | 7 |
| Wrecker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* 3 ongoing acid        |   | 1 |
| Ooze      | damage.                                           | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Splitter:* The first time an ochre jelly takes   | P | 9 |
|           | 20 or more damage from a single attack, it splits | D | 0 |
|           | into two normal-size ochre jellies, each with     | * |   |
|           | half the original's current hit points plus 2d6   | * |   |
|           | hp. Treat the new jellies as undamaged jellies at |   |   |
|           | their new hit point totals without the *splitter* | * |   |
|           | ability.                                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gelatinous Cube

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Shlup'n'schlorp +10 vs. PD**---30 acid damage, | A |   |
| level    | and the cube engulfs the target (functions like  | C | 1 |
|          | a grab) if it's smaller than the cube            | * | 8 |
| Blocker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The cube can make a *spasms* attack as a |   | 1 |
| Ooze     | free action.                                     | * | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Spasms +10 vs. AC (up | P | 2 |
|          | to 2 attacks, each against a different nearby    | D | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---15 damage                             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Engulf and dissolve:* Targets engulfed/grabbed  |   |   |
|          | by the cube take 30 acid damage at the start of  | * |   |
|          | the cube's turn but are not viable targets for   | * |   |
|          | additional attacks by the cube. Multiple targets | M |   |
|          | can be held within the cube simultaneously.      | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | Any engulfed creature that is also staggered     | * |   |
|          | must begin making last gasp saves or become      |   |   |
|          | paralyzed as the cube's toxins overwhelm it.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Black Pudding

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 9th    | **C: Acid-drenched pseudopod +14 vs. PD (up to 4 | A |   |
| level    | attacks, each against a different nearby         | C | 2 |
|          | enemy)**---30 acid damage, and 10 ongoing acid   | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Ooze     | *Miss:* 10 acid damage.                          | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Climber:* A black pudding sticks to ceilings    | P | 4 |
|          | and walls when it wishes, sliding along as       | D | 7 |
|          | easily as on the floor.                          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Slippery:* The pudding has *resist weapons      |   |   |
|          | 12+*.                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Orc

#### Orc Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Jagged sword +6 vs. AC**---6 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Dangerous:* The crit range of attacks by orcs    | * | 4 |
| Troop     | expands by 3 unless they are staggered.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orcish Archer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Scimitar +6 vs. AC**---6 damage                 | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Short bow +6 vs. AC**---7 damage             | * | 7 |
| Archer    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 1--5:* Reroll the attack against a       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | random nearby creature. If the rerolled attack is | * | 1 |
|           | also a natural 1--5, the orcish archer takes 3    | * |   |
|           | damage from sheer agonized frustration, but it    | P | 3 |
|           | doesn't get to make another attack.               | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Final frenzy:* When the escalation die is 3+,    | * |   |
|           | the orcish archer gains a +3 bonus to melee       |   |   |
|           | attacks and melee damage                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orc Berserker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | **Greataxe +7 vs. AC**---8 damage                 | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Dangerous:* The crit range of attacks by orcs    | * | 5 |
| Troop     | expands by 3 unless they are staggered.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Unstoppable:* When an orc berserker drops to 0   | * | 3 |
|           | hp, it does not immediately die. Ignore any       | * |   |
|           | damage in excess of 0 hp, roll 2d6, and give the  | P | 4 |
|           | berserker that many temporary hit points. No      | D | 0 |
|           | other healing can affect the berserker or give it | * |   |
|           | more temporary hit points. When the temporary hp  | * |   |
|           | are gone, the berserker dies.                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orc Shaman

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Spear +6 vs. AC**---6 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Dangerous:* The crit range of attacks by orcs    | * | 2 |
| Leader    | expands by 3 unless they are staggered.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Battle curse +7 vs. MD (1d3 nearby           | * | 6 |
|           | enemies)**---4 psychic damage, and for the rest   | * |   |
|           | of the battle, melee attacks by orcs deal +1d4    | P | 3 |
|           | damage against the target (non-cumulative)        | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Pit-Spawn Orc

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Punch or bludgeon +7 vs. AC**---5 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Mob attack:* The crit range for pit-spawn orcs   | * | 5 |
| Mook      | is 17+. Whenever a pit-spawn orc scores a         | * |   |
|           | critical hit, each pit-spawn orc mook in the      |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | battle gains a +1 cumulative bonus to damage      | * | 2 |
|           | until the end of the battle.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Boiling rage:* When an enemy engaged with the    | * |   |
|           | orc hits it with an attack, the enemy takes 4     |   |   |
|           | damage as the orc bites and claws it back.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cave Orc

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6, or +12 at night or in dark caves  | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Obsidian knife +8 vs. AC**---4 damage, and +1d4 | A |   |
| level     | damage for each other orc engaged with the target | C | 1 |
|           | (max +4d4)                                        | * | 8 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Rock +7 vs. AC**---5 damage                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Hears everything:* Increase the DC to sneak past | * |   |
|           | cave orcs silently by +5.                         | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Nocturnal predator:* If the battle is at night   | * |   |
|           | (or in darkness), the orc gains a +2 attack       | * |   |
|           | bonus. If the battle is during the day (or in     |   |   |
|           | daylight) it takes a --2 penalty to all defenses. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Death-Plague Orc

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | **Huge spiked flail +8 vs. AC**---21 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural roll is above target's Constitution:*    | * | 8 |
| Spoiler   | The target catches a disease (see below).         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | When a creature contracts a death-plague orc      | * | 2 |
|           | disease, roll a d4 for the disease type and a d6  | * |   |
|           | for that disease's symptoms *after the battle*.   | P | 9 |
|           | Until cured, at the start of each day (after each | D | 0 |
|           | full heal-up) the PC makes a Constitution check   | * |   |
|           | (including any appropriate background) to         | * |   |
|           | determine the severity of the disease for that    |   |   |
|           | day, or if the PC is cured.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | Full bed rest under the care of a healer reduces  | M |   |
|           | severity roll from a d6 to a d4 (so a severity    | D |   |
|           | check result of 18 would be 1d4 + 2 not 1d6 + 2). | * |   |
|           | A PC under the care of and experience healer or   | * |   |
|           | someone who knows healing magic gains a +10 bonus |   |   |
|           | to the Constitution check. At the GM's option,    | * |   |
|           | special ingredients or healing items, found via   | * |   |
|           | quest, can give additional bonuses to the check.  | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | Disease Type (d4)                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | 1: Filthy Fever                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 2: Chatter Pox                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 3: Slug Scourge                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 4: Red Fever                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Disease Severity (Con check each day; result      |   |   |
|           | affects d6 symptoms roll)                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 1--14: d6 + 3                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 15--19: d6 + 2                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 20--24: d6 + 1                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 25--29: d6 + 0                                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 30+: Cured                                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Filthy Fever Symptoms (d6 roll for symptoms that  |   |   |
|           | day)                                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 1: Slight temperature.                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 2--3: The runs. You gain 1 less recovery than     |   |   |
|           | normal after a full heal-up due to fluid loss.    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 4+: You have a hacking cough that sounds like     |   |   |
|           | insane laughter and are losing fluids. You gain 2 |   |   |
|           | fewer recoveries than normal after a full heal-up |   |   |
|           | and can't remain silent.                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Chatter Pox Symptoms (d6 roll for symptoms that   |   |   |
|           | day)                                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 1: Unsightly and painful sores, occasional        |   |   |
|           | shivers.                                          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 2--3: Running sores, shivering and chattering     |   |   |
|           | teeth. You take a --3 penalty to social skill     |   |   |
|           | checks and to attack rolls with spells.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 4+: Infected sores, fever dreams. Your            |   |   |
|           | constitution is weakened. After each full         |   |   |
|           | heal-up, roll 1d4 + 3 to determine your starting  |   |   |
|           | maximum recoveries for that day. Each time you    |   |   |
|           | cast a spell that isn't at-will, there's a 25%    |   |   |
|           | chance it fails (but you don't expend the spell). |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Slug Scourge Symptoms (d6 roll for symptoms that  |   |   |
|           | day)                                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 1: Extreme appetite, nausea.                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 2--3: Vomiting up slugs. Whenever you make a      |   |   |
|           | non-combat Charisma check, roll 2d20 and take the |   |   |
|           | lower result.                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 4+: The slugs are inside your lungs! After each   |   |   |
|           | quick rest, you lose 25% of your maximum hit      |   |   |
|           | points. If you drop to 0 hp this way, you enter   |   |   |
|           | into a coma until the next day.                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Red Fever Symptoms (d6 roll for symptoms that     |   |   |
|           | day)                                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 1: Scarlet stripes on the eyeballs, itching,      |   |   |
|           | buzzing in ears.                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 2--3: Blurred vision. You take a --3 penalty to   |   |   |
|           | ranged attacks.                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | 4+: Fever, rage, and confusion. Whenever you roll |   |   |
|           | a natural odd attack roll, you are confused until |   |   |
|           | the end of your next turn. Ranged attacks have a  |   |   |
|           | 25% chance of accidentally targeting an ally      |   |   |
|           | (check before making the attack roll).            |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orc Battle Screamer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 3rd     | **Sharpened flute or club-like drumstick +9 vs.   | A |   |
| level     | AC**---10 damage                                  | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Leader    | [Orcish Instruments: Choose ONE]{.underline}      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Skull drum +7 vs. MD**---8 damage, and as a  | * | 5 |
|           | free action, one nearby orc ally can move or make | * |   |
|           | a basic attack (doesn't trigger special           | P | 3 |
|           | abilities)                                        | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Bone flute +7 vs. MD**---8 damage, and one   | * |   |
|           | nearby orc ally deals +1d6 damage on a hit during |   |   |
|           | its next turn                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: War bagpipes**---1d3 nearby or faraway       | M |   |
|           | enemies that can hear the bagpipes must           | D |   |
|           | immediately roll a normal save; on a failure, the | * |   |
|           | target is hampered until the end of its next turn | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orc Tusker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 3rd     | **Club'n'tusk +5 vs. AC**---7 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Furious charge:* The attack instead deals 12     | * | 7 |
| Troop     | damage on a hit if the orc tusker first moves     | * |   |
|           | before attacking an enemy it was not engaged with |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | at the start of its turn.                         | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 4 damage, and the orc tusker pops free    | P | 4 |
|           | from all enemies.                                 | D | 5 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Orc Rager

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 7th     | **Greataxe +12 vs. AC**---16 damage               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Dangerous mooks:* The crit range of melee        | * | 0 |
| Mook      | attacks by orc ragers expands by 3 until half the | * |   |
|           | orc rager mob has been dropped.                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *Dying strike:* When an orc rager drops to 0 hp,  | * |   |
|           | it can make a final attack as a free action.      | P | 2 |
|           | (These extra attacks can come from ragers engaged | D | 7 |
|           | with a PC.)                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Great Fang Cadre

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +13                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 10th    | **Double axe +15 vs. AC**---25 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 11+:* The cadre can make a second        | * | 5 |
| Mook      | *double axe* attack (no more) as a free action.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Humanoid  | *Dangerous mooks:* The crit range of melee        | * | 1 |
|           | attacks by great fang cadre orcs expands by 3     | * |   |
|           | until half the great fang cadre mob has been      | P | 5 |
|           | dropped.                                          | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Big, black, creaking bow +15 vs. AC**---37   | * |   |
|           | damage                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The attack targets PD | * |   |
|           | instead of AC.                                    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *On the spot mutation:* Whenever an attack        |   |   |
|           | eliminates one or more members of the mob, there  | * |   |
|           | is a 50% chance that each survivor gains one of   | * |   |
|           | these abilities: extra melee attack, damage aura: | H |   |
|           | 1d20 damage vs. any enemy that starts its turn    | P |   |
|           | engaged with the orc, or +4 bonus to AC.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Otyugh

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Grasping tentacles +8 vs. PD (2 attacks)**---5  | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Blocker   | *Natural even hit:* The otyugh can grab the       | * |   |
|           | target.                                           |   | 1 |
| A         |                                                   | * | 3 |
| berration | *Natural 18 or 20:* The otyugh can grab the       | * |   |
|           | target and make a *big toothy maw* attack against | P | 8 |
|           | it as a free action.                              | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Big toothy maw +12 vs. AC (one enemy it's       | * |   |
|           | grabbing; includes +4 grab bonus)**---16 damage   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Trash nest defense:* The otyugh gains a +2 bonus | * |   |
|           | to all defenses while fighting in its nest or in  | M |   |
|           | similar piles of excrement and trash.             | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Tentacle flail:* Once per round, an otyugh can   | * |   |
|           | make a *grasping tentacles* attack as a free      |   |   |
|           | action against a moving nearby creature it is not | * |   |
|           | engaged with; on a natural even hit, the target   | * |   |
|           | is grabbed and its movement stops.                | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Owlbear

#### Snowy Owlbear

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | **Peck & tear +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---8        | A |   |
| level    | damage, and until the end of the owlbear's next  | C | 1 |
|          | turn, the target is hampered while engaged with  | * | 7 |
| Spoiler  | the owlbear                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Natural even hit:* Until the end of the snowy   | * | 4 |
|          | owlbear's next turn, the target is hampered      | * |   |
|          | while engaged with the owlbear.                  | P | 9 |
|          |                                                  | D | 4 |
|          | *Feed the cubs:* A snowy owlbear that scores a   | * |   |
|          | critical hit against a hampered enemy tears a    | * |   |
|          | piece of the creature off (GM chooses a limb)    |   |   |
|          | and will subsequently attempt to retreat with    | * |   |
|          | the prize, screeching to its cubs to flee with   | * |   |
|          | it. The torn-up enemy is stunned until the end   | M |   |
|          | of its next turn.                                | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Protect the cubs:* The snowy owlbear's crit     | * |   |
|          | range expands by 1 for each owlbear cub that has |   |   |
|          | dropped this battle.                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist cold 14+:* Attacks that deal cold damage | H |   |
|          | deal half damage to the snowy owlbear unless     | P |   |
|          | they roll a natural 14+.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Silent hunter:* Checks to hear a snowy owlbear  |   |   |
|          | take a -5 penalty.                               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Snowy Owlbear Cub

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Weakling | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 3rd    | **Beak or claw +7 vs. AC**---6 damage            | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Rolly-polly:* Gains a +3 bonus on disengage     | * | 5 |
| Troop    | checks, or adds the escalation die, whichever is | * |   |
|          | higher.                                          |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | *Resist cold 12+:* Attacks that deal cold damage | * |   |
|          | deal half damage to the snowy owlbear cub unless | P | 3 |
|          | they roll a natural 14+.                         | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Weakling:* This monster only counts as half a   | * |   |
|          | normal monster when building battles.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Owlbear

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Rip and peck +9 vs. AC**---15 damage, and      | A |   |
| level    | until the end of the owlbear's next turn, the    | C | 1 |
|          | target is hampered while engaged with the        | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | owlbear                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Vicious hybrid:* If the escalation die is even, | * | 3 |
|          | make another *rip and peck* attack.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Feed the cubs:* An owlbear that scores a        | D | 0 |
|          | critical hit against a hampered enemy tears a    | * | 1 |
|          | piece of the creature off (GM chooses a limb)    | * |   |
|          | and will subsequently attempt to retreat with    |   |   |
|          | the prize to feed its cubs. The torn-up enemy is | * |   |
|          | stunned until the end of its next turn.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | Silent hunter: Owlbears are nearly silent until  | D |   |
|          | they strike. Checks to hear them approaching     | * |   |
|          | take a --5 penalty.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Great Horned Owlbear

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Rip and peck +11 vs. AC**---20 damage, and     | A |   |
| level    | until the end of the owlbear's next turn, the    | C | 1 |
|          | target is hampered while engaged with the        | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | owlbear                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Savage hybrid:* If the escalation die is odd,   | * | 4 |
|          | make another *rip and peck* attack.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Feed the cubs:* An owlbear that scores a        | D | 2 |
|          | critical hit against a hampered enemy tears a    | * | 0 |
|          | piece of the creature off (GM chooses a limb)    | * |   |
|          | and will subsequently attempt to retreat with    |   |   |
|          | the prize, screeching to its cubs to flee with   | * |   |
|          | it. The torn-up enemy is stunned until the end   | * |   |
|          | of its next turn.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Silent hunter:* Checks to hear a great horned   | * |   |
|          | owlbear take a -5 penalty.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Half owl, half bear, half marvel:* Until the    | * |   |
|          | escalation die is 5+, if no enemies are hampered | * |   |
|          | at the start of the great horned owlbear's turn, | H |   |
|          | it regenerates 3d6 hit points.                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Phase Spider

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Phasing fangs +11 vs. PD (2 attacks)**---25    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural even hit:* The spider can make a        | * |   |
|          | *rummage and filch* attack against the target as |   | 1 |
| Beast    | a free action, even if the target isn't          | * | 8 |
|          | staggered.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **Rummage and filch +11 vs. MD (one staggered    | D | 0 |
|          | creature)**---The phase spider steals a random   | * | 0 |
|          | true magic item from the target (see below).     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Phasing abilities:* As long as it didn't just   | * |   |
|          | return from being out of phase, at the start of  | * |   |
|          | the phase spider's turn, roll a d6 to see which  | M |   |
|          | of its phase and teleport abilities it can       | D |   |
|          | access that turn. The spider doesn't have to use | * |   |
|          | the available ability and can attack normally,   | * |   |
|          | if it wishes.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **1--2:** *Short teleport*---As a move action,   | * |   |
|          | the spider can teleport anywhere it can see      | H |   |
|          | nearby.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **3:** *Long teleport*---As a move action, the   | * |   |
|          | spider can teleport anywhere it can see nearby   |   |   |
|          | or faraway.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **4--5:** *Phase out*---As a move action, the    |   |   |
|          | spider can remove itself from the battlefield,   |   |   |
|          | returning on its next initiative turn anywhere   |   |   |
|          | it chooses nearby. It doesn't get to make a      |   |   |
|          | phase roll at the start of its next turn though. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **6:** *Teleport away*---If the spider has       |   |   |
|          | stolen at least one magic item, as a move action |   |   |
|          | it can teleport back to its lair, or to its      |   |   |
|          | master if it has one. It leaves the battle. If   |   |   |
|          | it hasn't stolen an item yet, it won't leave and |   |   |
|          | can use its choice of the other abilities this   |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stolen items:* If the spider is slain before it |   |   |
|          | leaves battle, all items stolen from the party   |   |   |
|          | are recovered. If a d20 roll results in a 20,    |   |   |
|          | other magic items are found.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Phoenix

#### Flamebird Phoenix

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 3rd    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Fly-by flaming talons +8 vs. AC**---16 damage, | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | and 5 ongoing fire damage                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural even hit or miss:* The phoenix may move | * | 5 |
| lemental | again this turn as a free action if it has       | * |   |
|          | already made a flying move on its turn.          | P | 7 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Miss:* The flamebird phoenix can use a *flaming | * |   |
|          | screech* attack as a quick action, either this   | * |   |
|          | turn, or on its next turn.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Usually special trigger, but also possible as | * |   |
|          | a standard action\]* **C: Flaming screech +8 vs. | M |   |
|          | PD (1d3 nearby enemies)**---5 fire damage, and 5 | D |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The flamebird phoenix can fly          |   |   |
|          | extremely well.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flaming wings:* The flamebird phoenix deals 4   | H |   |
|          | fire damage to each enemy that ends it turn      | P |   |
|          | engaged with the phoenix.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spectacular effects:* When the phoenix is dealt |   |   |
|          | a critical hit, it must roll an easy save (6+).  |   |   |
|          | If the save fails, the phoenix drops to 0 hit    |   |   |
|          | points; see the *reborn in fire* ability below!  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reborn in fire:* Whenever the phoenix drops to  |   |   |
|          | 0 hit points, roll a d20 and add the escalation  |   |   |
|          | die. For each time this phoenix has rolled its   |   |   |
|          | *reborn in fire* ability earlier this battle,    |   |   |
|          | subtract 10 from the roll. For example, a        |   |   |
|          | phoenix making its second *reborn in fire* roll  |   |   |
|          | (because its first roll ended up being 20+!)     |   |   |
|          | when the escalation die is 6 would roll the d20  |   |   |
|          | and subtract 4.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **20+:** The flamebird phoenix is immediately    |   |   |
|          | reborn, healing to 40 hit points, and keeps      |   |   |
|          | fighting!                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **15--19:** The phoenix is reborn in fire, but   |   |   |
|          | vaults into the overworld, removed from the      |   |   |
|          | battle. On the other hand, it's not done with    |   |   |
|          | the PCs! Add the phoenix to an upcoming battle   |   |   |
|          | by surprise, adding it as an additional monster  |   |   |
|          | not accounted for by the usual                   |   |   |
|          | encounter-building calculations.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **8--14:** The flamebird phoenix is reborn in    |   |   |
|          | fire but wants nothing more to do with this      |   |   |
|          | battle. It makes the following attack, but when  |   |   |
|          | the attack is over it shoots off into the        |   |   |
|          | overworld so quickly that it's a teleport        |   |   |
|          | effect, and does not return to the battle, nor   |   |   |
|          | to the adventure.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Conflagration of rebirth +9 vs. PD (every      |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy)**---10 fire damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **7 or less:** The phoenix flares back to life   |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby in a few hours, days, months,   |   |   |
|          | or years. Probably not relevant to the PCs       |   |   |
|          | unless they or the phoenix bear a special        |   |   |
|          | grudge.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fire eater:* If a fire attack against the       |   |   |
|          | flamebird phoenix fails to beat its resistance,  |   |   |
|          | then instead of taking damage the flamebird      |   |   |
|          | phoenix heals that amount instead.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Resurgent Phoenix

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Fly-by flaming talons +10 vs. AC**---25        | * | 7 |
| Leader   | damage, and 10 ongoing fire damage               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural even hit or miss:* The phoenix may move | * | 7 |
| lemental | again this turn as a free action if it has       | * |   |
|          | already made a flying move on its turn.          | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* The resurgent phoenix can use a *victory | * | 4 |
|          | screech* attack as a quick action, either this   | * |   |
|          | turn, or on its next turn.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Usually special trigger, but also possible as | * |   |
|          | a standard action\]* **C: Victory screech +10    | M |   |
|          | vs. MD (1d3 nearby or faraway enemies)**---10    | D |   |
|          | psychic damage, and the resurgent phoenix and    | * |   |
|          | its allies can add +1 to their attacks until the | * |   |
|          | start of the resurgent phoenix's next turn; the  |   |   |
|          | bonus is cumulative if more than one *victory    | * |   |
|          | screech* attack hits.                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | **Ignition +10 vs. PD (the creature that         | P |   |
|          | triggered the attack)**---8 fire damage and 8    | * |   |
|          | ongoing fire damage                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, as an interrupt action  |   |   |
|          | when an enemy makes a melee attack against the   |   |   |
|          | phoenix.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* The resurgent phoenix can fly as well  |   |   |
|          | or better than anything you've seen airborne.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flaming wings:* The resurgent phoenix deals 7   |   |   |
|          | fire damage to each enemy that ends it turn      |   |   |
|          | engaged with the phoenix.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spectacular effects:* When the phoenix is dealt |   |   |
|          | a critical hit, it must roll an easy save (6+).  |   |   |
|          | If the save fails, the phoenix drops to 0 hit    |   |   |
|          | points; see the *reborn in fire* ability below!  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reborn in fire:* Whenever the phoenix drops to  |   |   |
|          | 0 hit points, roll a d20 and add the escalation  |   |   |
|          | die. For each time this phoenix has rolled its   |   |   |
|          | *reborn in fire* ability earlier this battle,    |   |   |
|          | subtract 10 from the roll. For example, a        |   |   |
|          | phoenix making its second *reborn in fire* roll  |   |   |
|          | (because its first roll ended up being 20+!)     |   |   |
|          | when the escalation die is 6 would roll the d20  |   |   |
|          | and subtract 4.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **20+:** The resurgent phoenix is immediately    |   |   |
|          | reborn, healing to 70 hit points and keeps       |   |   |
|          | fighting!                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **15--19:** The phoenix is reborn in fire, but   |   |   |
|          | vaults into the overworld, removed from the      |   |   |
|          | battle. On the other hand, it's not done with    |   |   |
|          | the PCs! Add the phoenix to an upcoming battle   |   |   |
|          | by surprise, adding it as an additional monster  |   |   |
|          | not accounted for by the usual                   |   |   |
|          | encounter-building calculations.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **8--14:** The resurgent phoenix is reborn in    |   |   |
|          | fire but wants nothing more to do with this      |   |   |
|          | battle. It makes the following attack, but when  |   |   |
|          | the attack is over it shoots off into the        |   |   |
|          | overworld so quickly that it's a teleport        |   |   |
|          | effect, and does not return to the battle, nor   |   |   |
|          | to the adventure.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Conflagration of rebirth +11 vs. PD (every     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy)**---15 fire damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **7 or less:** The phoenix flares back to life   |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby in a few hours, days, months,   |   |   |
|          | or years. Probably not relevant to the PCs       |   |   |
|          | unless they or the phoenix bear a special        |   |   |
|          | grudge.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Void Phoenix

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Fly-by talons +13 vs. AC**---60 damage, and 10 | A |   |
| level    | ongoing negative energy damage (hard save ends,  | C | 1 |
|          | 16+)                                             | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The phoenix may move |   | 2 |
| E        | again this turn as a quick action if it has      | * | 2 |
| lemental | already made a flying move on its turn.          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* The void phoenix can use a *void         | D | 3 |
|          | calling* attack as a quick action, either this   | * | 0 |
|          | turn, or on its next turn.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Usually special trigger, but also possible as | * |   |
|          | a standard action\]* **C: Void calling +13 vs.   | * |   |
|          | PD (1d3 nearby or faraway enemies in a           | M |   |
|          | group)**---35 negative energy damage             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Target is dazed (save ends). | * |   |
|          | Target takes 10 negative energy damage each time |   |   |
|          | it fails the save.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The void phoenix can fly amazingly     | H |   |
|          | well for a creature that is turning itself       | P |   |
|          | spiritually inside out.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Void aura:* Enemies that end their turns        |   |   |
|          | engaged with the void phoenix must attempt an    |   |   |
|          | easy save (6+). If the save fails, they're dazed |   |   |
|          | until the end of their next turn.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire and negative energy 16+:* When a    |   |   |
|          | fire attack or negative energy attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spectacular effects:* When the phoenix is dealt |   |   |
|          | a critical hit, it must roll an easy save (6+).  |   |   |
|          | If the save fails, the phoenix drops to 0 hit    |   |   |
|          | points; see the *reborn in void* ability below!  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reborn in void:* Whenever the phoenix drops to  |   |   |
|          | 0 hit points, roll a d20 and add the escalation  |   |   |
|          | die. For each time this void phoenix has rolled  |   |   |
|          | its *reborn in void* ability earlier this        |   |   |
|          | battle, subtract 10 from the roll. For example,  |   |   |
|          | a void phoenix making its second *reborn in      |   |   |
|          | void* roll (because its first roll ended up      |   |   |
|          | being 20+!) when the escalation die is 6 would   |   |   |
|          | roll the d20 and subtract 4.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **20+:** The void phoenix is immediately reborn, |   |   |
|          | healing to 120 hit points above staggered and    |   |   |
|          | keeps fighting!                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **15--19:** The void phoenix is reborn in a      |   |   |
|          | blast of cold and fire and negative energy, but  |   |   |
|          | vaults into the overworld, removed from the      |   |   |
|          | battle. On the other hand, it's not done with    |   |   |
|          | the PCs! Add the phoenix to an upcoming battle   |   |   |
|          | by surprise, adding it as an additional monster  |   |   |
|          | not accounted for by the usual                   |   |   |
|          | encounter-building calculations. Add a level if  |   |   |
|          | you feel like it, because it's angry.            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **8--14:** The void phoenix is reborn in a blast |   |   |
|          | of negative energy but wants nothing more to do  |   |   |
|          | with this battle. It makes the following attack, |   |   |
|          | but when the attack is over it shoots off into   |   |   |
|          | the overworld so quickly that it's a teleport    |   |   |
|          | effect, and does not return to the battle, nor   |   |   |
|          | to the adventure.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Void rebirth +13 vs. PD (every nearby          |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---35 fire and negative energy damage    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **7 or less:** The phoenix flares back to life   |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby in a few hours, days, months,   |   |   |
|          | or years. Probably not relevant to the PCs       |   |   |
|          | unless they or the phoenix bear a special        |   |   |
|          | grudge.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Solar Phoenix

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 12th   | **Fly-by talons +17 vs. AC**---140 damage, and   | A |   |
| level    | 20 ongoing fire damage (hard save ends, 16+)     | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit or miss:* The phoenix may move | * |   |
|          | again this turn as a quick action if it has      |   | 2 |
| E        | already made a flying move on its turn.          | * | 4 |
| lemental |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The solar phoenix can use a *solar wind* | P | 6 |
|          | attack as a quick action, either this turn, or   | D | 4 |
|          | on its next turn.                                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Usually special trigger, but also possible as |   |   |
|          | a standard action\]* **Solar wind +17 vs. PD     | * |   |
|          | (1d4 nearby or faraway enemies)**---70 fire      | * |   |
|          | damage, or 120 fire damage if used as a standard | M |   |
|          | action.                                          | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* The solar phoenix    | * |   |
|          | teleports to a point nearby or faraway.          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The solar phoenix flies like the sun   | * |   |
|          | unleashed.                                       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Flaming wings:* The solar phoenix deals 20 fire | * |   |
|          | damage to each enemy that ends it turn engaged   | * |   |
|          | with the phoenix.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets    |   |   |
|          | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural  |   |   |
|          | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half     |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spectacular effects:* When the solar phoenix is |   |   |
|          | dealt a critical hit, it must roll an easy save  |   |   |
|          | (6+). If the save fails, the phoenix drops to 0  |   |   |
|          | hit points; see the *reborn in fire* ability     |   |   |
|          | below!                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reborn in fire:* Whenever the phoenix drops to  |   |   |
|          | 0 hit points, roll a d20 and add the escalation  |   |   |
|          | die. For each time this phoenix has rolled its   |   |   |
|          | *reborn in fire* ability earlier this battle,    |   |   |
|          | subtract 10 from the roll. For example, a        |   |   |
|          | phoenix making its second *reborn in fire* roll  |   |   |
|          | (because its first roll ended up being 20+!)     |   |   |
|          | when the escalation die is 6 would roll the d20  |   |   |
|          | and subtract 4.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **20+:** The solar phoenix is immediately        |   |   |
|          | reborn, healing to 400 hit points and keeps      |   |   |
|          | fighting!                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **15--19:** The phoenix is reborn in fire, but   |   |   |
|          | vaults into the overworld, removed from the      |   |   |
|          | battle. On the other hand, it's not done with    |   |   |
|          | the PCs! Add the phoenix to an upcoming battle   |   |   |
|          | by surprise, adding it as an additional monster  |   |   |
|          | not accounted for by the usual                   |   |   |
|          | encounter-building calculations.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **8--14:** The solar phoenix is reborn in fire   |   |   |
|          | but wants nothing more to do with this battle.   |   |   |
|          | It makes the following attack, but when the      |   |   |
|          | attack is over it shoots off into the overworld  |   |   |
|          | so quickly that it's a teleport effect, and does |   |   |
|          | not return to the battle, nor to the adventure.  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Conflagration of rebirth +17 vs. PD (every     |   |   |
|          | nearby enemy)**---90 fire damage                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **7 or less:** The phoenix flares back to life   |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby in a few hours, days, months,   |   |   |
|          | or years. Probably not relevant to the PCs       |   |   |
|          | unless they or the phoenix bear a special        |   |   |
|          | grudge. But who are we kidding? This is a solar  |   |   |
|          | phoenix. It has its own agenda, and the PCs just |   |   |
|          | got onto the agenda, one way or another.         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Pixie

All pixies have the *glamour* ability.

*Glamour*: Outside of combat, pixies can create complex illusions at
will. For the PC, it's usually a normal or hard skill check to sort out
what's real.

#### Pixie Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 3rd    | **Diminutive sparkly sword +8 vs. PD**---5       | A |   |
| level    | psychic damage                                   | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural 16+:* The pixie warrior can make a      | * |   |
|          | *madness* attack against the target as a free    |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | action.                                          | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Enchanted bowshot +8 vs. PD**---4 psychic   | P | 2 |
|          | damage, and the pixie warrior can make a         | D | 4 |
|          | *madness* attack against the target as a free    | * |   |
|          | action.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Madness +8 vs.           | * |   |
|          | MD**---The target is maddened until the end of   | * |   |
|          | the pixie's next turn. The first thing the       | M |   |
|          | creature does on its turn is use a standard      | D |   |
|          | action to make a display of power that has no    | * |   |
|          | practical benefit. The GM chooses the attack,    | * |   |
|          | spell, or other power, which should be the most  |   |   |
|          | powerful one the character has, preferably a     | * |   |
|          | daily. The target expends the power in a great   | * |   |
|          | show of prowess, aimed for display rather than   | H |   |
|          | effect. Wizards cast their fireballs into the    | P |   |
|          | sky, monks demonstrate flawless form while       | * |   |
|          | shadow-boxing, and clerics bless the very stones | * |   |
|          | underfoot instead of allies.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | When the madness effect gets old, substitute any |   |   |
|          | of the following effects, by choice or at        |   |   |
|          | random:                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *1:* You love pixies and hate those who threaten |   |   |
|          | them. The target is confused until the end of    |   |   |
|          | the pixie's next turn.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *2:* Brains knocked loose. The target takes 4    |   |   |
|          | psychic damage each time it takes an action      |   |   |
|          | (save ends; yes that could be 3 times per round  |   |   |
|          | or more).                                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *3:* Reality bender. The target takes 5 ongoing  |   |   |
|          | psychic damage. Each time the target fails the   |   |   |
|          | save, the ongoing damage increases by 5,         |   |   |
|          | cumulative.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *4:* Massive attack on the unconscious mind. The |   |   |
|          | target chooses one: either let the onslaught     |   |   |
|          | slam its mind (take 15 psychic damage), or steel |   |   |
|          | its mind against the onslaught (stunned until    |   |   |
|          | the end of the pixie's next turn).               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *5:* Compulsion to dance. The target takes 5     |   |   |
|          | ongoing psychic damage (no save) until it spends |   |   |
|          | a standard action to dance maniacally. Dancing   |   |   |
|          | ends all such ongoing damage, even if the target |   |   |
|          | has been hit multiple times with this effect.    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *6:* Pacifism. The target can't attack until the |   |   |
|          | end of the pixie's next turn.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Dazzling lights:* During battle, pixies fill    |   |   |
|          | the air with the light and sound of countless    |   |   |
|          | flashy illusions. The effects are disorienting   |   |   |
|          | enough that the PCs don't get to add the         |   |   |
|          | escalation die to their attacks.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Pixies make flying look like a lot of  |   |   |
|          | fun.                                             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Invisibility:* When an enemy attacks a pixie    |   |   |
|          | and misses, the pixie turns invisible until the  |   |   |
|          | start of its next turn (even if it makes         |   |   |
|          | opportunity attacks). A pixie can also turn      |   |   |
|          | invisible as a standard action, in which case    |   |   |
|          | the invisibility still lasts until the start of  |   |   |
|          | its next turn.                                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Predatory Plant

#### Claw Flower

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | **Serrated claw +7 vs. AC**---8 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 1--5:* The claw flower takes 1d4 damage  | * | 2 |
| Spoiler   | from burst roots.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Plant     | **C: Bumble spores +4 vs. MD (1d2 nearby random   | * | 5 |
|           | non-plant creatures)**---The effect depends on    | * |   |
|           | the roll                                          | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* 4 psychic damage, and the     | * |   |
|           | target is confused until end of its next turn.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* 3 psychic damage, and the      | * |   |
|           | target is stuck until end of its next turn.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Miss:* 2 psychic damage.                         | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Immobile until pressed:* The claw flower has     | * |   |
|           | roots and normally can't move, but when it takes  |   |   |
|           | 10 or more damage from a single attack it can     | * |   |
|           | move normally during its next turn.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Spore escalator:* The claw flower adds the       | P |   |
|           | escalation die to its *bumble spores* attack      | * |   |
|           | rolls.                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Gentle roar:* Once per battle, the claw flower   |   |   |
|           | can make a *bumble spores* attack as a quick      |   |   |
|           | action.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Pixie Pod

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **C: Peripheral summoning +8 vs. MD (one random   | A |   |
| level     | nearby enemy)**---8 psychic damage                | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| Leader    | *Natural even hit:* Add a new podling into the    | * |   |
|           | battle in a random location.                      |   | 1 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *Release the pods:* Once per battle when the      | * |   |
|           | pixie pod rolls a natural even hit with           | P | 4 |
|           | peripheral summoning, it adds a number of         | D | 0 |
|           | podlings into the battle equal to the escalation  | * |   |
|           | die instead of only one.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Immobile:* Although its podlings occasionally    | * |   |
|           | pick up and move it around out of combat, in      | * |   |
|           | battle the pixie pod can't move and is stuck      | M |   |
|           | except for its teleport ability.                  | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* This creature can't make      | * |   |
|           | opportunity attacks.                              |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lurching teleport:* Once per battle as a move    | * |   |
|           | action, the pixie-pod can teleport to a nearby    | H |   |
|           | location. But its control sucks. The teleport     | P |   |
|           | goes in a random direction. Roll it using a d8    | * |   |
|           | for direction.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Magical concealment:* As long as one or more of  |   |   |
|           | its podlings are nearby, the pixie pod is         |   |   |
|           | invisible and extremely difficult to even detect. |   |   |
|           | A PC who wants to locate the pixie-pod must spend |   |   |
|           | a standard action searching and succeed at a DC   |   |   |
|           | 25 skill check using Wisdom. Backgrounds          |   |   |
|           | connected to plants and the wilderness help       |   |   |
|           | normally, and general searching skills and magic  |   |   |
|           | talents might help a bit but not at full          |   |   |
|           | strength. Once located, the plant can be attacked |   |   |
|           | like a normal invisible creature. When it         |   |   |
|           | teleports, however, it must be located all over   |   |   |
|           | again.                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Start with mooks:* The pixie pod is normally     |   |   |
|           | accompanied by five active podlings that don't    |   |   |
|           | count toward the total when building a battle     |   |   |
|           | with the pod. Additional podlings do count,       |   |   |
|           | however.                                          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Podling

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Needle sword +8 vs. AC**---6 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target can't choose to    | * | 7 |
| Mook      | search for the pixie-pod plant until all podlings | * |   |
|           | in the battle are slain.                          |   | 1 |
| Plant     |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | **R: Tiny green bow +8 vs. AC**---5 damage        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* The podling that can fly, hovering out  | * |   |
|           | of reach and firing arrows, can be a real pain in |   |   |
|           | the pate.                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Purple Worm

#### Parasitic Lightning Beetle

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 8th     | **Mouthparts +12 vs. AC**---10 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target also takes | * | 2 |
| Mook      | 5 lightning damage.                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | **R: Lightning zap +12 vs. PD (one nearby enemy   | * | 7 |
|           | not engaged with a purple worm, purple larvae, or | * |   |
|           | parasitic beetle)**---20 lightning damage         | P | 3 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target takes 5    | * |   |
|           | extra lightning damage.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* The beetles fly badly, usually just     | * |   |
|           | enough to get back to the worm when they've been  | * |   |
|           | shaken off from their hiding spots in its         | M |   |
|           | segments.                                         | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Scaredy bugs:* Whenever one or more parasitic    | * |   |
|           | lightning beetles drop to 0 hp, roll a d6. If you |   |   |
|           | roll less than or equal to the number of beetles  | * |   |
|           | that were destroyed by that attack, all beetles   | * |   |
|           | in the battle stop fighting, using all their      | H |   |
|           | actions during their next turn to disengage and   | P |   |
|           | fly away.                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Purple Larva

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 8th     | **Bitey maw +13 vs. AC**---20 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The larvae can make a | * | 0 |
| Mook      | *tail sting* attack against a random enemy        | * |   |
|           | engaged with it as a free action.                 |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Tail sting +13 vs.        | * |   |
|           | AC**---5 damage, and 10 ongoing poison damage     | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           | *Merge with worm:* Purple larvae can dig quickly  | * |   |
|           | in and out of the skin of the purple worm as if   | * |   |
|           | they were burrowing but without needing die rolls |   |   |
|           | to succeed.                                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Purple Worm

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Devouring maw +13 vs. PD**---50 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is swallowed      | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | whole if it's smaller than the worm (see below). | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * | 7 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Tail sting +13 vs. AC (one random nearby       | P | 4 |
|          | enemy)**---20 damage, and 20 ongoing poison      | D | 4 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Mighty thrash +13 vs. AC (1d3 random nearby |   |   |
|          | enemies)**---30 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 1--5:* The worm takes 10 damage (but it | * |   |
|          | still deals miss damage on a 2--5).              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The worm can make this attack as  | * |   |
|          | a free action if it has no enemies swallowed     | * |   |
|          | after using its standard action during its turn. | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Swallow whole:* While a creature is swallowed   | * |   |
|          | whole, it takes 7d10 acid damage at the start of | * |   |
|          | its turn and is stuck, hampered, and unable to   |   |   |
|          | attack or affect anything outside the worm's     |   |   |
|          | stomach (and vice-versa). Most teleport          |   |   |
|          | abilities don't work because you're hampered     |   |   |
|          | *and* you can't see the location out of the worm |   |   |
|          | you want to teleport to. There are two ways out. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Cut your way out:** Deal 40 damage to the worm |   |   |
|          | with a single attack and you can cut your way    |   |   |
|          | out. All edged or bladed weapons are reduced to  |   |   |
|          | d6 damage dice (at most) inside the worm's       |   |   |
|          | gullet, so good luck. At least you'll be         |   |   |
|          | damaging the worm attacking it from within.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Get upchucked:** While the worm is staggered,  |   |   |
|          | you can use a standard action to try and crawl   |   |   |
|          | out of its mouth. Roll a hard save (16+); on a   |   |   |
|          | success, the worm vomits you out and spits you   |   |   |
|          | somewhere nearby. The worm also vomits out all   |   |   |
|          | creatures it has swallowed when it drops to 0    |   |   |
|          | hp.                                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Larval feeding:* The worm's stomach also        |   |   |
|          | includes a mob of larval mooks (purple larvae or |   |   |
|          | parasitic lightning beetles). Feel free to add   |   |   |
|          | this nastier special if a PC acts dismissive     |   |   |
|          | about the possibility of being swallowed by the  |   |   |
|          | worm.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Resist most energy damage 16+:* Purple worms    |   |   |
|          | generate weird energy resistances thanks to      |   |   |
|          | underworld radiation and their odd diets. Roll a |   |   |
|          | d8 twice, in secret, to determine what energy    |   |   |
|          | types the worm is not resistant to. The PCs      |   |   |
|          | probably have to find out what energy works best |   |   |
|          | against the worm the hard way, though you might  |   |   |
|          | have mercy and allow a DC 35 Wisdom skill check  |   |   |
|          | to figure out what energy types work against the |   |   |
|          | worm.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **1:** acid; **2:** cold; **3:** fire; **4:**    |   |   |
|          | lightning; **5:** thunder; **6:** holy; **7:**   |   |   |
|          | negative energy; **8:** poison.                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Ancient Purple Worm

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 27 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | **Devouring maw +18 vs. PD**---100 damage        | A | 25 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is swallowed      | * | 21 |
| Wrecker  | whole if it's smaller than the worm (see below). | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 12 |
| Beast    | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * | 00 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **Tail sting +18 vs. AC (up to 2 random nearby   | P |    |
|          | enemies)**---40 damage, and 40 ongoing poison    | D |    |
|          | damage                                           | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **Prodigious thrash +18 vs. AC (1d4 random       | * |    |
|          | nearby enemies)**---50 damage                    | M |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | *Miss:* Half damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural 1--2:* The worm and any creatures it    |   |    |
|          | has swallowed take 8d6 damage (but it still      | * |    |
|          | deals miss damage on a 2).                       | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Limited use:* The worm can make this attack as  | P |    |
|          | a free action if it has one enemy swallowed or   | * |    |
|          | less after using its standard action during its  | * |    |
|          | turn.                                            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Swallow whole:* While a creature is swallowed   |   |    |
|          | whole, it takes 10d12 acid damage at the start   |   |    |
|          | of its turn and is stuck, hampered, and unable   |   |    |
|          | to attack or affect anything outside the worm's  |   |    |
|          | stomach (and vice-versa). Most teleport          |   |    |
|          | abilities don't work because you're hampered     |   |    |
|          | *and* you can't see the location out of the worm |   |    |
|          | you want to teleport to. There are two ways out. |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Cut your way out:** Deal 80 damage to the worm |   |    |
|          | with a single attack and you can cut your way    |   |    |
|          | out. All edged or bladed weapons are reduced to  |   |    |
|          | d6 damage dice (at most) inside the worm's       |   |    |
|          | gullet, so good luck. At least you'll be         |   |    |
|          | damaging the worm attacking it from within.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Get upchucked:** While the worm is staggered,  |   |    |
|          | you can use a standard action to try and crawl   |   |    |
|          | out of its mouth. Roll a hard save (16+); on a   |   |    |
|          | success, the worm vomits you out and spits you   |   |    |
|          | somewhere nearby. The worm also vomits out all   |   |    |
|          | creatures it has swallowed when it drops to 0    |   |    |
|          | hp.                                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability, but   |   |    |
|          | with a +5 bonus to the check.                    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Resist most energy damage 16+:* Purple worms    |   |    |
|          | generate weird energy resistances thanks to      |   |    |
|          | underworld radiation and their odd diets. Roll a |   |    |
|          | d8 twice, in secret, to determine what energy    |   |    |
|          | types the worm is not resistant to. The PCs      |   |    |
|          | probably have to find out what energy works best |   |    |
|          | against the worm the hard way, though you might  |   |    |
|          | have mercy and allow a DC 35 Wisdom skill check  |   |    |
|          | to figure out what energy types work against the |   |    |
|          | worm.                                            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **1:** acid; **2:** cold; **3:** fire; **4:**    |   |    |
|          | lightning; **5:** thunder; **6:** holy; **7:**   |   |    |
|          | negative energy; **8:** poison.                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Rakshasa

[Nastier Special for all rakshasas]{.underline}

*Lockheart:* The first time a rakshasa is dropped to 0 hit points, it
dies but will definitely be reborn, even if the PCs attempt to use an
icon die result to prevent the resurrection. A PC who scores a critical
hit against the rakshasa can attempt to nullify *lockheart* by choosing
to ignore all other effects of the critical hit (all damage, not just
the doubling) and attempting a normal save. If the save succeeds,
*lockheart* is ignored this battle. If the save fails, *lockheart* is
still in effect. A rakshasa can only use *lockheart* once in its
lifetime.

Alternatively, instead of rolling saves, the PCs could go on a quest to
find the lockheart's key before confronting the rakshasa! That's a story
angle you get to manipulate as you choose.

*Backwards palms:* When staggered, the rakshasa's hands shapeshift so
that its palms trade places with the backs of its hands. It not only
looks extremely weird, it also presents the player characters with an
odd choice: The next time the escalation die would advance, the PCs have
to choose whether the escalation die will decrease by 1 (minimum 0) or
whether this rakshasa gets to use the escalation die until the end of
the battle. If the PC group is split, the decision goes to the character
with the highest initiative.

#### Rakshasa Sybarite

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Silver-shod claws +11 vs. AC (2                | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---12 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Caster   | *Attack also beats the target's PD:* 12 ongoing  | * |   |
|          | poison damage.                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 9 |
|          | **C: Powders, potions, and lotions +11 vs. PD    | * |   |
|          | (1d3 nearby enemies in a group)**---20 poison    | P | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | D | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural 2 or 12 hit:* Target is weakened until  | * |   |
|          | they next take damage.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 3 or 13 hit:* Target is vulnerable to   | * |   |
|          | poison attacks until the end of the battle.      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Natural 4 or 14 hit:* Target is hampered until  | * |   |
|          | they next heal or gain temporary hp.             | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 5 or 15 hit:* Target is hampered until  | * |   |
|          | they next hit with an attack.                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Natural 6 or 16 hit:* Target is stuck, save     | P |   |
|          | ends.                                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 7 or 17 hit:* Target is dazed, easy     |   |   |
|          | save ends.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 8 or 18 hit:* Target is stunned until   |   |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 9 or 19 hit:* Target is confused, easy  |   |   |
|          | save ends.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 7 poison damage.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Psychic seduction +11 vs. MD (1d3+1 nearby  |   |   |
|          | or faraway enemies in a group, group must        |   |   |
|          | contain at least two targets)**---20 psychic     |   |   |
|          | damage, and the target is confused (hard save    |   |   |
|          | ends)                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss, but another target in the group was hit:* |   |   |
|          | Target is confused until the end of its next     |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *All targets missed:* The *psychic seduction*    |   |   |
|          | attack is not expended can be used again this    |   |   |
|          | battle.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 20 skill   |   |   |
|          | check.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Contrabando:* The rakshasa has a stash of       |   |   |
|          | illicit substances---once per battle as a quick  |   |   |
|          | action, it can either deal 20 ongoing poison     |   |   |
|          | damage to one enemy that it has just left        |   |   |
|          | engagement with OR become dazed but heal 30 hit  |   |   |
|          | points at the end of each of its turns (save     |   |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechanger's surprise:* Once per battle as a  |   |   |
|          | quick action the rakshasa changes forms to       |   |   |
|          | something that causes consternation and          |   |   |
|          | misunderstanding among its enemies---causing     |   |   |
|          | each enemy to become dazed until the enemy with  |   |   |
|          | the lowest MD saves.                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa, Devourer of Wizards

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 7th    | **Terrible claws +11 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---15   | A |   |
| level    | damage, and target is hampered (save ends)       | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Caster   | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **R: Psychic freeze +11 vs. MD (1d3 nearby       | * | 1 |
|          | enemies)**---40 psychic damage, and 10 ongoing   | * |   |
|          | psychic damage and target is stuck (save ends    | P | 2 |
|          | both)                                            | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *A taste for high magic:* The devourer of        | * |   |
|          | wizards adds the escalation die to its attacks   |   |   |
|          | and damage when it targets a creature that has   | * |   |
|          | one or more icon relationship points with the    | * |   |
|          | Magic Icon.                                      | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Unstoppable pounce:* The first time an enemy    | * |   |
|          | tries to intercept the devourer of wizards each  | * |   |
|          | round, the devourer of wizards can roll a single |   |   |
|          | rending claws attack against the would-be        | * |   |
|          | interceptor. If the attack hits, the             | * |   |
|          | interception is ignored and the devourer of      | H |   |
|          | wizards can continue moving to its target        | P |   |
|          | unimpeded.                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 20 skill   |   |   |
|          | check.                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Claws and bite +11 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit:* The rakshasa can make a      | * |   |
|          | *rend mind* attack as a free action.             |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **R: Striped lightning bolts +13 vs. PD (1d3     | * |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---25 lightning damage, or 50   | P | 2 |
|          | lightning damage against a staggered target      | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The rakshasa can make a      | * |   |
|          | *rend mind* attack as a free action.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Rend mind +13 vs. MD (one nearby            | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---15 psychic damage, and the target is  | M |   |
|          | confused (*make a basic or at-will attack vs.    | D |   |
|          | ally*) until the end of the rakshasa's next turn | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      | * |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       | * |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 25 skill   | H |   |
|          | check.                                           | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Master of chaos:* The rakshasa gains a bonus to |   |   |
|          | all defenses equal to the current number of      |   |   |
|          | confused enemies in the battle.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reversal of fate:* Once per day as a quick      |   |   |
|          | action, the rakshasa steals the escalation die;  |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle, the rakshasa gains  |   |   |
|          | an attack bonus equal to the die's value when it |   |   |
|          | was stolen. Reset the escalation die to 0 for    |   |   |
|          | the players and increase it normally with each   |   |   |
|          | new round.                                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa Delver

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Awful bite +14 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---25       | A |   |
| level    | damage, and target is hampered (save ends)       | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Caster   | *Miss:* 8 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | **C: Ten-foot collapsing staff +14 vs. AC (one   | * | 0 |
|          | nearby enemy, or +10 attack against two nearby   | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---60 damage, and if there is a pit or | P | 2 |
|          | ledge next to the target it must save or be      | D | 3 |
|          | pushed off and potentially take falling damage   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Mesmerizing magic +14 vs. MD (1d3 nearby or |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies that can see the                 | * |   |
|          | rakshasa)**---25 psychic damage, and if it is    | * |   |
|          | the first time this battle this target is hit it | M |   |
|          | becomes confused until the end of its next turn  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* When the target is no longer      | * |   |
|          | confused it takes 50 psychic damage.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shadowy step:* When the escalation die advances | * |   |
|          | the rakshasa teleports as a free action to any   | H |   |
|          | spot it can see nearby or faraway. If the        | P |   |
|          | rakshasa is engaged with a PC, that character's  | * |   |
|          | player can choose to prevent the teleportation   | * |   |
|          | at the cost of the escalation die not advancing. |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow pounce:* Once per round as a free action |   |   |
|          | when an enemy moves into engagement with the     |   |   |
|          | rakshasa it can roll a save (11+), on a success  |   |   |
|          | the rakshasa teleports into engagement with the  |   |   |
|          | enemy with the fewest hit points.                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 20 skill   |   |   |
|          | check.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Allies:* The rakshasa isn't alone---it bought a |   |   |
|          | team of hirelings and hangers-on into the        |   |   |
|          | dungeon with it, though they are currently       |   |   |
|          | elsewhere. When the escalation die reaches 3+    |   |   |
|          | these allies rush into the fight and act at the  |   |   |
|          | start of the round.                              |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa Mastermind

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Decisive bite +14 vs. AC**---75 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Miss:* 45 damage.                               | * | 0 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Striped lightning bolts +14 vs. PD (1d3     |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | nearby enemies)**---40 lightning damage, or 80   | * | 3 |
|          | lightning damage against a staggered target      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The rakshasa can make a      | D | 3 |
|          | *rend mind* attack as a free action.             | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Rend mind +14 vs. MD (one nearby            |   |   |
|          | enemy)**---30 psychic damage, and the target is  | * |   |
|          | confused (save ends)                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Hidden plans:* As a standard action, the        | D |   |
|          | rakshasa mastermind rolls a d4 or a d6, your     | * |   |
|          | choice. If the roll is equal to or less than the | * |   |
|          | escalation die, a number of the rakshasa         |   |   |
|          | mastermind's allies equal to the die roll will   | * |   |
|          | enter the battle in the *next* round. Each new   | * |   |
|          | ally should be about as tough as a single PC     | H |   |
|          | according to the building battles table. Explain | P |   |
|          | this ability as the culmination of the           | * |   |
|          | rakshasas' cunning plans.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 20 skill   |   |   |
|          | check.                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa Saint

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Dreadful claws +15 vs. AC (1d3 attacks)**---40 | * | 2 |
| Caster   | damage and 40 ongoing damage                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Humanoid | *Two attacks hit the same target on the same     | * | 4 |
|          | turn:* The target's saves against ongoing damage | * |   |
|          | become hard (16+) until the end of the battle.   | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | **R: Arrows of radiance +15 vs. MD (1d3 nearby   | * | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---40 force damage, and target is      | * |   |
|          | stuck                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Enemies who are no longer stuck   | * |   |
|          | take 40 ongoing force damage.                    | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Faked miracle, real magic:* Once per battle the | * |   |
|          | rakshasa does something miraculous. Of course    | * |   |
|          | the 'miracle' is artful illusion together with   |   |   |
|          | some cleverly used basic spells, but all who     | * |   |
|          | witness it must save (11+) or become confused    | * |   |
|          | until the end of the rakshasa's next turn.       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* Enemies who are no longer         | * |   |
|          | confused become hampered (save ends).            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Commanding presence:* The rakshasa saint can    |   |   |
|          | use a quick action to command 1d3 confused       |   |   |
|          | enemies to move as a free action, or take        |   |   |
|          | another non-attack action (drop a weapon,        |   |   |
|          | destroy a potion, unlock a door) as a free       |   |   |
|          | action.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      |   |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       |   |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 25 skill   |   |   |
|          | check.                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Real miracles?:* The rakshasa has a real link   |   |   |
|          | to the divine (or maybe it's actually a link to  |   |   |
|          | the infernal realms, or a bargain with the chaos |   |   |
|          | of the outer dark). Twice per battle as a free   |   |   |
|          | action the rakshasa can cause itself or a nearby |   |   |
|          | ally to heal an amount equal to half that        |   |   |
|          | creature's maximum hit points.                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rakshasa Magician

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +19                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 11th   | **Claws and bite +14 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit:* The rakshasa can make a      | * |   |
|          | *rend mind* attack as a free action.             |   | 2 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | **R: Striped lightning bolts +16 vs. PD (1d3     | * |   |
|          | nearby enemies)**---25 lightning damage, or 50   | P | 2 |
|          | lightning damage against a staggered target      | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The rakshasa can make a      | * |   |
|          | *rend mind* attack as a free action.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Rend mind +16 vs. MD (one nearby            | * |   |
|          | enemy)**---15 psychic damage, and the target is  | M |   |
|          | confused until the end of the rakshasa's next    | D |   |
|          | turn                                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shapechange:* As a standard action, the         |   |   |
|          | rakshasa can change its form to that of any      | * |   |
|          | humanoid, or back to its own shape. Seeing       | * |   |
|          | through the shapechange requires a DC 25 skill   | H |   |
|          | check.                                           | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Master of chaos:* The rakshasa gains a bonus to | * |   |
|          | all defenses equal to the current number of      |   |   |
|          | confused enemies in the battle.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Reversal of fate:* Once per day as a quick      |   |   |
|          | action, the rakshasa steals the escalation die;  |   |   |
|          | until the end of the battle, the rakshasa gains  |   |   |
|          | an attack bonus equal to the die's value when it |   |   |
|          | was stolen. Reset the escalation die to 0 for    |   |   |
|          | the players and increase it normally with each   |   |   |
|          | new round.                                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Reaver

#### Death Marker

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Marked for death +10 vs. PD**---7 negative      | * | 6 |
| Mook      | energy damage                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| Undead    | *Target is hit by a marked for death attack for   | * | 0 |
|           | the second time this battle:* Until the end of    | * |   |
|           | the battle, when the target tries to spend a      | P | 2 |
|           | recovery they have to succeed at a save (11+)     | D | 5 |
|           | first. If they fail, they haven't used their      | * |   |
|           | action but can't spend recoveries that turn.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Target is hit for the third time this battle:*   | * |   |
|           | The save to spend a recovery is now a hard save   | * |   |
|           | (16+).                                            | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Target is hit for the fourth time this battle:*  | * |   |
|           | Until the end of the battle the target cannot     | * |   |
|           | spend recoveries.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Phasing flight:* Death markers can float on      | * |   |
|           | unseen winds, moving through solid objects and    | H |   |
|           | creatures as though they were not there. The      | P |   |
|           | death marker must still end its move on solid     | * |   |
|           | ground and not inside an object or creature.      | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Death Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +7, or immediately after the reaver  | * | 2 |
|          | that created it                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    |                                                  | A |   |
| level    | Vulnerability: holy                              | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Mook     | **Soul-grab +11 vs. PD**---11 ongoing negative   | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    |   | 1 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 3 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target is dazed (--4 attack)  | * |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *Flight:* Death shades can hover and fly about   | * |   |
|          | easily.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Partial phasing:* As a quick action, a death    | * |   |
|          | shade can pass through a small or narrow solid   | * |   |
|          | object or pop free from all enemies engaged with | M |   |
|          | it. When a creature intercepts a death shade,    | D |   |
|          | that creature takes 11 negative energy damage.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shadow of death:* A death shade gains a +2      |   |   |
|          | attack bonus against the last creature in the    | * |   |
|          | battle to roll a death save. Death shades        | * |   |
|          | specifically target dying or helpless creatures  | H |   |
|          | unless somebody is actively attacking them while | P |   |
|          | standing over the body of the dying or helpless  | * |   |
|          | creature.                                        | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Reaver

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Reaping scythe +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---26   | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | negative energy damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | *Both attacks hit the same target:* Until the    | * | 0 |
|          | end of its next turn, the target is affected by  | * |   |
|          | the reaver's *fear aura* even if it has more     | P | 1 |
|          | than 36 hp.                                      | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | *Phasing:* While the escalation die is odd, the  | * |   |
|          | reaver takes no damage and suffers no effects    |   |   |
|          | from attacks with natural attack rolls less than | * |   |
|          | 18+ (or 16+ for attacks that deal holy damage).  | * |   |
|          | It does take full damage and effects from        | M |   |
|          | attacks that are able to affect it.              | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | While phasing, the reaver can move but creatures | * |   |
|          | can't intercept it, and it can travel through    |   |   |
|          | solid objects but not end its turn in them. In   | * |   |
|          | addition, while phasing the reaver can't attack  | * |   |
|          | (including opportunity attacks) or affect the    | H |   |
|          | physical world except in the following way: When | P |   |
|          | an enemy starts its turn engaged with the phased | * |   |
|          | reaver, it takes 13 negative energy damage.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | The reaver can also use *phasing* outside of     |   |   |
|          | battle, but only for a short time.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Call upon death shades:* Until the reaver drops |   |   |
|          | to 0 hp, when one of its living (not undead or   |   |   |
|          | construct) enemies or non-mook allies rolls a    |   |   |
|          | death save or dies, a death shade enters the     |   |   |
|          | battle. Death shades act immediately after the   |   |   |
|          | reaver in initiative order.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | enemies with 36 hp or fewer are dazed (--4       |   |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     |   |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Reavers ignore the bonds of gravity    |   |   |
|          | while they're phasing.                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gruesome Death Shade

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +10, or immediately after the reaver | * | 2 |
|          | that created it                                  | * | 5 |
| 10th   |                                                  | A |   |
| level    | Vulnerability: holy                              | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Mook     | **Soul-grab +14 vs. PD**---25 ongoing negative   | * |   |
|          | energy damage                                    |   | 1 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Natural 18+:* The target is dazed (--4 attack)  | * |   |
|          | until the end of its next turn.                  | P | 5 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Flight:* Death shades can hover and fly about   | * |   |
|          | easily.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Partial phasing:* As a quick action, a death    | * |   |
|          | shade can pass through a small or narrow solid   | * |   |
|          | object or pop free from all enemies engaged with | M |   |
|          | it. When a creature intercepts a death shade,    | D |   |
|          | that creature takes 25 negative energy damage.   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shadow of death:* A death shade gains a +2      |   |   |
|          | attack bonus against the last creature in the    | * |   |
|          | battle to roll a death save. Death shades        | * |   |
|          | specifically target dying or helpless creatures  | H |   |
|          | unless somebody is actively attacking them while | P |   |
|          | standing over the body of the dying or helpless  | * |   |
|          | creature.                                        | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Gruesome Reaver

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Reaping scythe +15 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---50   | * | 4 |
| Spoiler  | negative energy damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | *Both attacks hit the same target:* Until the    | * | 0 |
|          | end of its next turn, the target is affected by  | * |   |
|          | the reaver's *fear aura* even if it has more     | P | 3 |
|          | than 72 hp.                                      | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Phasing:* While the escalation die is odd, the  | * |   |
|          | reaver takes no damage and suffers no effects    |   |   |
|          | from attacks with natural attack rolls less than | * |   |
|          | 18+ (or 16+ for attacks that deal holy damage).  | * |   |
|          | It does take full damage and effects from        | M |   |
|          | attacks that are able to affect it.              | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | While phasing, the reaver can move but creatures | * |   |
|          | can't intercept it, and it can travel through    |   |   |
|          | solid objects but not end its turn in them. In   | * |   |
|          | addition, while phasing the reaver can't attack  | * |   |
|          | (including opportunity attacks) or affect the    | H |   |
|          | physical world except in the following way: When | P |   |
|          | an enemy starts its turn engaged with the phased | * |   |
|          | reaver, it takes 25 negative energy damage.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | The reaver can also using phasing outside of     |   |   |
|          | battle, but only for a short time.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Call upon death shades:* Until the reaver drops |   |   |
|          | to 0 hp, when one of its living (not undead or   |   |   |
|          | construct) enemies or non-mook allies rolls a    |   |   |
|          | death save or dies, a death shade enters the     |   |   |
|          | battle. Death shades act immediately after the   |   |   |
|          | reaver in initiative order.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Death aura:* When the escalation die is 6+, all |   |   |
|          | normal saves made during the battle become hard  |   |   |
|          | saves (16+).                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fear aura:* While engaged with this creature,   |   |   |
|          | enemies with 72 hp or fewer are dazed (--4       |   |   |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     |   |   |
|          | their attacks.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* Reavers ignore the bonds of gravity    |   |   |
|          | while they're phasing.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Marked by death:* When a creature disengages or |   |   |
|          | moves away from a reaver that's phasing, that    |   |   |
|          | creature is vulnerable to negative energy until  |   |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unholy backlash:* Deal 3d10 negative energy     |   |   |
|          | damage to any creature that targets the gruesome |   |   |
|          | reaver with an attack that deals holy damage.    |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Redcap

All redcaps have special abilities based on *The Bad Word*. Before every
battle against redcaps, the GM should determine the *bad word* for that
battle. Whenever a PC or a player at the table says the word, every
redcap in the battle can use their associated ability as a free action
that interrupts whatever action is currently happening.

#### Splotchcap

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | **Stabby knife +5 vs. AC**---6 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target also takes 2 ongoing    | * | 7 |
| Archer    | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Smashy slingstone +7 vs. AC**---7 damage     | * | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target can't cast a spell      | P | 3 |
|           | until the end of its next turn or until the       | D | 2 |
|           | splotchcap drops to 0 hp, whichever comes first.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Pop-out and stab 'em   |   |   |
|           | +7 vs. AC (one nearby enemy)**---8 damage         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* Damage equal to the escalation die.       | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Impossible teleport:* When the splotchcap scores | * |   |
|           | a critical hit OR when a PC or a player at the    | * |   |
|           | table says the *bad word*, the splotchcap can     |   |   |
|           | teleport to a nearby hidden location it can see   | * |   |
|           | as a free action.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Pop-out surprise:* When the splotchcap starts    | P |   |
|           | its turn and no enemy can see it, it can make a   | * |   |
|           | *pop-out and stab 'em* attack that turn as a      | * |   |
|           | standard action.                                  |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Redcap

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Twin skinning knives +8 vs. AC (2               | A |   |
| level     | attacks)**---6 damage                             | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| Wrecker   | *Miss:* Damage equal to the escalation die.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **Stompy iron boots +8 vs. PD (one staggered or   | * | 5 |
|           | unconscious enemy)**---12 damage                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | D | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Pop-out and ride 'em   | * |   |
|           | +10 vs. AC (one nearby enemy)**---10 damage, and  |   |   |
|           | 5 ongoing damage                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ridey-horsey:* While the target is taking        | M |   |
|           | ongoing damage from this attack, the redcap is    | D |   |
|           | riding the target's shoulders with its knives in  | * |   |
|           | the target's ears, and once during its turn the   | * |   |
|           | redcap can use a move action to make the target   |   |   |
|           | move anywhere nearby that won't directly cause it | * |   |
|           | harm (but opportunity attacks are fair game).     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Impossible teleport:* When the redcap scores a   | * |   |
|           | critical hit OR when a PC or a player at the      |   |   |
|           | table says the *bad word*, the redcap can         |   |   |
|           | teleport to a nearby hidden location it can see   |   |   |
|           | as a free action.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Pop-out surprise:* When the redcap starts its    |   |   |
|           | turn and no enemy can see it, it can make a       |   |   |
|           | *pop-out and ride 'em* attack that turn as a      |   |   |
|           | standard action.                                  |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Crimsoncap

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | **Huge bloody cleavers +11 vs. AC (2              | A |   |
| level     | attacks)**---13 damage, and the crimsoncap can    | C | 2 |
|           | pop free from the target                          | * | 1 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Horrible stompy boots +11 vs. PD (one staggered |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | or unconscious enemy)**---20 damage, and the      | * | 8 |
|           | target is hampered (save ends)                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Pop-out and slash 'em  | * |   |
|           | +11 vs. AC (1d4 nearby enemies)**---15 damage,    |   |   |
|           | and 5 ongoing damage                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 10 damage.                                | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Impossible teleport:* When the crimsoncap scores | * |   |
|           | a critical hit OR when a PC or a player at the    | * |   |
|           | table says the *bad word*, the crimsoncap can     |   |   |
|           | teleport to a nearby hidden location it can see   | * |   |
|           | or can't see (like inside a closet) as a free     | * |   |
|           | action.                                           | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Pop-out surprise:* When the crimsoncap starts    | * |   |
|           | its turn and no enemy can see it, it can make a   | * |   |
|           | *pop-out and slash 'em* attack that turn as a     |   |   |
|           | standard action                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *F\*\*\* T\*\*\*:* The crimsoncap has two *bad    |   |   |
|           | words* instead of one. And the PCs find that out  |   |   |
|           | the hard way. Write the words down ahead of time  |   |   |
|           | to prove you're not *just* being a mean GM.       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Crustycap

+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal     | Initiative: +14                                | * | 2 |
|            |                                                | * | 1 |
| 7th      | **Big bloody axe +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---10 | A |   |
| level      | damage                                         | C | 2 |
|            |                                                | * | 2 |
| Wrecker    | *Natural even hit:* The crustycap can make a   | * |   |
|            | single *big bloody axe* attack against a       |   | 1 |
| Humanoid   | different nearby enemy as a free action.       | * | 9 |
|            |                                                | * |   |
|            | *Miss:* 5 ongoing damage.                      | P | 1 |
|            |                                                | D | 0 |
|            | **Devastating stompy boots +12 vs. PD (one     | * | 0 |
|            | staggered or unconscious enemy)**---40 damage  | * |   |
|            |                                                |   |   |
|            | *Miss:* 10 damage.                             | * |   |
|            |                                                | * |   |
|            | *Oh no oh no:* When a PC or a player at the    | M |   |
|            | table says the *bad word*, the crustycap can   | D |   |
|            | take an extra standard action during its next  | * |   |
|            | turn. Feel free to let the extra actions stack | * |   |
|            | a few times if someone gets cocky.             |   |   |
|            |                                                | * |   |
|            | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                 | * |   |
|            |                                                | H |   |
|            | *Just plain mean:* When the crustycap scores a | P |   |
|            | critical hit OR when a PC or a player at the   | * |   |
|            | table says the *bad word*, the crustycap can   | * |   |
|            | teleport away as a free action. Faraway, even  |   |   |
|            | to a location it can't see, and out of the     |   |   |
|            | battle. Then at the start of the PCs' next     |   |   |
|            | battle, it teleports back and attacks the PCs, |   |   |
|            | no matter what enemies they are fighting. It   |   |   |
|            | will continue to use this power if it can      |   |   |
|            | until the PCs take a full heal-up, at which    |   |   |
|            | point, if it's still alive, it loses interest. |   |   |
+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|            |                                                |   |   |
+------------+------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Remorhaz

#### Squib Swarm

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +0                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 0 level   | **Sharp nibbling beaks +5 vs. AC**---3 cold       | A |   |
|           | damage                                            | C | 1 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Heat absorption:* When a creature is engaged     | * |   |
| Beast     | with the squib swarm at the start of its turn, it |   | 8 |
|           | takes cold damage equal to the escalation die.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Barbellite

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Arctic bite +11 vs. AC**---7 cold damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Heat absorption:* When a creature is engaged     | * | 6 |
| Troop     | with the remorhaz at the start of its turn, it    | * |   |
|           | takes cold damage equal to the escalation die.    |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Shatterer:* Death can cause fluid-filled sacks   | * |   |
|           | inside the barbellite to explode. When the attack | P | 3 |
|           | roll that kills the barbellite is a natural even  | D | 6 |
|           | roll, each nearby creature takes 10 cold damage.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Frost-Würm

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Würm glaciation +11 vs. AC**---18 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target and one other     | * | 0 |
| Troop    | nearby enemy takes 18 cold damage as the area    | * |   |
|          | freezes over.                                    |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 6 |
|          | *Miss:* The target and one other nearby enemy    | * |   |
|          | takes 6 cold damage.                             | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | **Trilling vibrations +9 vs. MD (1d3 nearby      | * | 0 |
|          | enemies in a group)**---The target is stunned    | * |   |
|          | (save ends)                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The remorhaz can use *trilling    | * |   |
|          | vibrations* only when the escalation die is odd. | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability,       | * |   |
|          | except the remorhaz only needs to roll 6+ in     | * |   |
|          | snow.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Massive heat absorption:* When a creature is    | * |   |
|          | engaged with the remorhaz at the start of its    | H |   |
|          | turn, it takes cold damage equal to twice the    | P |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Shatterer:* Death can cause fluid-filled sacks  |   |   |
|          | inside the frost-würm to explode. When the       |   |   |
|          | attack roll that kills the frost-würm is a       |   |   |
|          | natural even roll, each nearby creature takes 20 |   |   |
|          | cold damage.                                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Adult Remorhaz

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Death from below! +14 | A |   |
| level    | vs. AC (each nearby creature)**---45 damage; OR  | C | 2 |
|          | 22 damage, and the target is stunned (save ends) | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 8 |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, during the remorhaz's   | * |   |
|          | first turn or if appearing on the surface after  | P | 2 |
|          | burrowing.                                       | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **Savage bite +16 vs. AC**---50 damage, 20 fire  | * |   |
|          | damage, and the remorhaz grabs the target if     |   |   |
|          | it's not already grabbing a creature             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 fire damage.                          | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability,       | * |   |
|          | except the remorhaz only needs to roll 6+ in     | * |   |
|          | snow and ice.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Furnace aura:* When a creature is engaged with  | * |   |
|          | the remorhaz (or grabbed by it) at the start of  | H |   |
|          | its turn, it takes fire damage equal to 6 × the  | P |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bejeweled remorhaz:* The remorhaz has glowing   |   |   |
|          | "jewels" on its armored plates. When a nearby or |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy misses with an attack against the  |   |   |
|          | remorhaz, that enemy chooses one: It takes 10    |   |   |
|          | fire damage; OR one piece of its non-magical     |   |   |
|          | equipment (something useful, but player's        |   |   |
|          | choice) melts or burns up. Adjust skill checks   |   |   |
|          | or stats accordingly.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Remorhaz steamer:* The remorhaz is melting the  |   |   |
|          | ice/snow all the time and obscuring steam rises  |   |   |
|          | into the air. Ranged attacks against the         |   |   |
|          | remorhaz take a --2 penalty, or a --4 penalty if |   |   |
|          | the attacker is faraway.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spiney remorhaz:* The remorhaz is covered in    |   |   |
|          | red-hot spines. When a nearby enemy rolls a      |   |   |
|          | natural 1--5 with an attack roll, it takes 20    |   |   |
|          | fire damage unless it has somehow protected      |   |   |
|          | itself from the heat.                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Remorhaz Queen

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +2d10 (see *sluggish initiative*)    | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 11th   | **Bite and trample +17 vs. AC**---80 damage, 40  | A |   |
| level    | fire damage, and the remorhaz grabs the target   | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Wrecker  | *Miss:* The target and each other creature       | * |   |
|          | engaged with the remorhaz takes 20 fire damage.  |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **R: Nova blast +16 vs. PD (1d3 nearby           | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---100 fire damage                     | P | 5 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | *Miss:* 25 fire damage.                          | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Burrow:* As the standard monster ability,       |   |   |
|          | except the remorhaz only needs to roll 6+ in     | * |   |
|          | snow and ice.                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Furnace aura:* When a creature is engaged with  | D |   |
|          | the remorhaz (or grabbed by it) at the start of  | * |   |
|          | its turn, it takes fire damage equal to 10 × the | * |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Sluggish initiative:* The queen may be sluggish | * |   |
|          | after eating unsuccessful suitors, laying eggs,  | H |   |
|          | or moving across the ice like a rushing          | P |   |
|          | avalanche. Roll 2d10 to determine her current    | * |   |
|          | initiative.                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bejeweled remorhaz:* The remorhaz has glowing   |   |   |
|          | "jewels" on its armored plates. When a nearby or |   |   |
|          | faraway enemy misses with an attack against the  |   |   |
|          | remorhaz, that enemy chooses one: It takes 25    |   |   |
|          | fire damage; OR one piece of its non-magical     |   |   |
|          | equipment (something useful, GM's choice) melts  |   |   |
|          | or burns up. Adjust skill checks or stats        |   |   |
|          | accordingly.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Remorhaz steamer:* The remorhaz is melting the  |   |   |
|          | ice/snow all the time and obscuring steam rises  |   |   |
|          | into the air. Ranged attacks against the         |   |   |
|          | remorhaz take a --2 penalty, or a --4 penalty if |   |   |
|          | the attacker is faraway.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spiney remorhaz:* The remorhaz is covered in    |   |   |
|          | red-hot spines. When a nearby enemy rolls a      |   |   |
|          | natural 1--5 with an attack roll, it takes 30    |   |   |
|          | fire damage unless it has somehow protected      |   |   |
|          | itself from the heat.                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Rust Monster

#### Rust Monster

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Caustic bite +8 vs. AC (one creature wearing    | A |   |
| level     | light armor or no armor)**---10 damage, and 5     | C | 1 |
|           | ongoing acid damage                               | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is now considered to be |   | 1 |
| A         | wearing no armor (the armor is damaged beyond     | * | 3 |
| berration | repair; adjust defenses accordingly). If the      | * |   |
|           | target's armor is magical, the target must roll a | P | 4 |
|           | hard save (16+). On a success, the armor isn't    | D | 5 |
|           | affected. This effect is permanent until the      | * |   |
|           | creature obtains new armor.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Rusting antenna +8 vs. PD (one creature wearing | * |   |
|           | heavy armor)**---1 damage, and the target is now  | * |   |
|           | considered to be wearing no armor (the armor is   | M |   |
|           | damaged beyond repair; adjust defenses            | D |   |
|           | accordingly). If the target's armor is magical,   | * |   |
|           | the target must roll a hard save (16+). On a      | * |   |
|           | success, the armor isn't affected. This effect is |   |   |
|           | permanent until the creature obtains new armor.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Corrupting body:* Whenever a creature hits the   | H |   |
|           | rust monster with a melee weapon, the attacker    | P |   |
|           | must roll a save; on a failure, the weapon is     | * |   |
|           | destroyed. Magic weapons require an easy save     | * |   |
|           | (6+) instead. This effect is permanent.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Rust's targets:* Magic items wielded by          |   |   |
|           | creatures with 60 hp or more are not affected by  |   |   |
|           | the rust monster's ability to destroy items (but  |   |   |
|           | the target still takes damage).                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Saving quirks:* Before rolling a save for a      |   |   |
|           | magic item, a PC can gain a +5 bonus to the save  |   |   |
|           | by agreeing to roleplay the item's quirk as a     |   |   |
|           | huge element of their personality until the next  |   |   |
|           | full heal-up. Failure to live up to this          |   |   |
|           | roleplaying agreement means that the item hasn't  |   |   |
|           | received the support it needs from its owner to   |   |   |
|           | survive the rust monster's destructive effects,   |   |   |
|           | and the item is destroyed at the end of the next  |   |   |
|           | battle even if its owner successfully saved.      |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Big antenna:* When the rust monster scores a     |   |   |
|           | critical hit, it can try to destroy another       |   |   |
|           | random magic item in the target's possession (or  |   |   |
|           | a random normal item if the target has no other   |   |   |
|           | magic items). The creature must roll a save for   |   |   |
|           | the item, as usual.                               |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Rust Monster Obliterator

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Caustic bite +10 vs. AC (one creature wearing   | A |   |
| level     | light armor or no armor)**---18 damage, and 5     | C | 1 |
|           | ongoing acid damage                               | * | 9 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 14+:* The target is now considered to be |   | 1 |
| Demon     | wearing no armor (the armor is damaged beyond     | * | 5 |
|           | repair; adjust defenses accordingly). If the      | * |   |
|           | target's armor is magical, the target must roll a | P | 7 |
|           | hard save (16+). On a success, the armor isn't    | D | 2 |
|           | affected. This effect is permanent until the      | * |   |
|           | creature obtains new armor.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Rusting antenna +10 vs. PD (one creature        | * |   |
|           | wearing heavy armor)**---10 damage, and the       | * |   |
|           | target is now considered to be wearing no armor   | M |   |
|           | (the armor is damaged beyond repair; adjust       | D |   |
|           | defenses accordingly). If the target's armor is   | * |   |
|           | magical, the target must roll a hard save (16+).  | * |   |
|           | On a success, the armor isn't affected. This      |   |   |
|           | effect is permanent until the creature obtains    | * |   |
|           | new armor.                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | Each time the rust monster obliterator destroys   | P |   |
|           | heavy armor with this attack, it gains a          | * |   |
|           | different random demon ability until the end of   | * |   |
|           | the battle (reroll duplicate abilities). (See the |   |   |
|           | demon abilities table.)                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Corrupting body:* Whenever a creature hits the   |   |   |
|           | rust monster with a melee weapon, the attacker    |   |   |
|           | must roll a save; on a failure, the weapon is     |   |   |
|           | destroyed. Magic weapons require an easy save     |   |   |
|           | (6+) instead. This effect is permanent.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Rust's targets:* Magic items wielded by          |   |   |
|           | creatures with 100 hp or more are not affected by |   |   |
|           | the rust monster's ability to destroy items (but  |   |   |
|           | the target still takes damage).                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Saving quirks:* Before rolling a save for a      |   |   |
|           | magic item, a PC can gain a +5 bonus to the save  |   |   |
|           | by agreeing to roleplay the item's quirk as a     |   |   |
|           | huge element of their personality until the next  |   |   |
|           | full heal-up. Failure to live up to this          |   |   |
|           | roleplaying agreement means that the item hasn't  |   |   |
|           | received the support it needs from its owner to   |   |   |
|           | survive the rust monster's destructive effects,   |   |   |
|           | and the item is destroyed at the end of the next  |   |   |
|           | battle even if its owner saved.                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Tail whirligig:* When an enemy targets the rust  |   |   |
|           | monster obliterator with a spell, the rust        |   |   |
|           | monster rolls a save. On a success, the spell has |   |   |
|           | no effect on the rust monster. If the rust        |   |   |
|           | monster is staggered, it must roll a hard save    |   |   |
|           | (16+) instead.                                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Sahuagin

#### Sahuagin Raider

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Coral-tipped spear +6 vs. AC**---6 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit against a stuck or hampered     | * | 4 |
| Troop     | enemy:* The target takes 1d6 extra damage.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Hooked net +6 vs. PD**---3 damage            | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save  | P | 3 |
|           | ends).                                            | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is stuck (save      | * |   |
|           | ends).                                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/battle.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Blood rage:* The sahuagin raider gains a +2      | D |   |
|           | attack bonus while it's staggered.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Water breather:* Sahuagin breathe underwater and |   |   |
|           | swim very well.                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Razor Shark

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Razortoothed jaws +7 vs. AC**---4 damage        | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Increase the damage by +1 for | * | 4 |
| Mook      | each razor shark mook that has dropped this       | * |   |
|           | battle.                                           |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           | *Natural even miss:* The target and the razor     | * |   |
|           | shark each take 1d6 damage.                       | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Frenzy (group):* When two or more razor sharks   | * |   |
|           | in the same mob are dropped to 0 hp by an attack, | * |   |
|           | as a free action each dropped razor shark attacks |   |   |
|           | one random nearby non-razor shark creature before | * |   |
|           | it dies. That creature takes 1d8 damage.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Water breather:* Sharks breathe underwater and   | D |   |
|           | swim very well. They're not so good out of sea    | * |   |
|           | water (even if they jump), so treat them as       | * |   |
|           | semi-hazardous terrain while they're busy         |   |   |
|           | thrashing to death outside the water.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sahuagin

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Trident and bite +10 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---10  | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| Wrecker   | *Natural 20:* Increase the escalation die by 1,   | * |   |
|           | and the target is hampered until the end of its   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | next turn.                                        | * | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Barbed crossbow +9 vs. AC (one nearby enemy, | P | 7 |
|           | or a faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---10 damage, and | D | 0 |
|           | 5 ongoing damage                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Blood frenzy:* Make a note of the escalation die |   |   |
|           | when the sahuagin becomes staggered. The sahuagin | * |   |
|           | gains a bonus to its melee attacks and damage     | * |   |
|           | equal to the escalation die value for the rest of | M |   |
|           | the battle.                                       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Water breather:* Sahuagin breathe underwater and | * |   |
|           | swim very well.                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Demon-touched:* Roll a d6 on the demon abilities | P |   |
|           | table. The sahuagin gains that ability.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sahuagin Glow Priest

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Coral rod +10 vs. AC**---12 damage              | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The priest teleports  | * | 6 |
| Caster    | the target next to one of its nearby allies that  | * |   |
|           | it can see, who engages it as a free action. It   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | can't teleport the target to a location that      | * | 9 |
|           | causes it direct damage (so into a pool of        | * |   |
|           | flaming oil is out, but off a ship into the sea   | P | 7 |
|           | is fine).                                         | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Glowpriest's prayer +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby   | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---12 psychic damage, and if the attack |   |   |
|           | hits 2 or more targets, roll 1d8 after the attack | * |   |
|           | for the prayer's effect                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *1--2 (Hymn of hate):* One random nearby          | D |   |
|           | conscious enemy takes 4d6 negative energy damage. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *3--4 (Curse of despair):* Each target that was   |   |   |
|           | hit takes a --2 penalty (non-cumulative) to all   | * |   |
|           | saves until the end of the battle.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *5--6 (Scream of victory):* Until the start of    | P |   |
|           | the glowpriest's next turn, each sahuagin and     | * |   |
|           | demon in the battle adds the escalation die to    | * |   |
|           | its attacks and the PCs don't.                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *7--8 (Word of refuge):* Remove the glowpriest    |   |   |
|           | from play. At the start of its next turn, return  |   |   |
|           | it to play nearby its original location. It gains |   |   |
|           | a +4 bonus to all defenses until the end of its   |   |   |
|           | next turn after it returns to play.               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Water breather:* Sahuagin breathe underwater and |   |   |
|           | swim very well.                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Iron Sea Shark

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 5th     | **Massive iron jaws +10 vs. AC**---14 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 2d6 damage.                               | * | 9 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Frenzy:* While staggered, if the iron sea shark  |   | 1 |
| Beast     | is unengaged at the start of its turn, it must    | * | 4 |
|           | roll an easy save (6+). On a failure, the shark   | * |   |
|           | must move and attack a random nearby enemy that's | P | 3 |
|           | staggered, or a random nearby if there are no     | D | 2 |
|           | staggered enemies.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shredder:* When an enemy misses with a melee     |   |   |
|           | attack against an iron sea shark and rolls a      | * |   |
|           | natural 1--5, the attacker takes 2d6 damage.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Water breather:* Sharks breathe underwater and   | D |   |
|           | swim very well. They're not so good out of sea    | * |   |
|           | water (even if they jump), so treat them as       | * |   |
|           | semi-hazardous terrain while they're busy         |   |   |
|           | thrashing to death outside the water.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Sahuagin Mutant

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Four-armed frenzy +11 vs. AC (1d4              | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---15 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural 4, 8, 12, 16, 20:* The target takes 10  | * |   |
|          | ongoing damage.                                  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid |                                                  | * | 5 |
|          | **R: Heavy crossbow +10 vs. AC (one nearby or    | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---30 damage                     | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 10 ongoing       | * | 0 |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited escalator:* The sahuagin mutant adds    | * |   |
|          | the escalation die to its attacks until the die  | * |   |
|          | is 5+.                                           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Water breather:* Sahuagin breathe underwater    | * |   |
|          | and swim very well.                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Punisher:* When an enemy intercepts the         | H |   |
|          | sahuagin mutant, it takes 4d8 damage from the    | P |   |
|          | mutant's claws and teeth.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ripper:* When an enemy makes a melee attack     |   |   |
|          | against the sahuagin mutant and rolls a natural  |   |   |
|          | odd miss, that enemy takes 2d8 damage.           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Salamander

[Abilities for All Salamanders]{.underline}

*Escalating inferno:* If the salamander is in an area with flames, lava,
or that it has set on fire, it gets to use the escalation die, adding it
to its attack rolls. Even when not fighting in such an environment, a
salamander attacked with a spell or attack that deals fire damage gets
to use the escalation die until the end of its next turn, or longer if
it's a powerful or lingering spell. Avoid casting fireball in battle
with a salamander!

*Resist fire 16+:* Fire attacks against the salamander must roll a
natural 16+ attack roll or the attack does half damage. Whether or not
such an attack hits, see escalating inferno!

[Nastier Special]{.underline}

*Heat metal:* Enemies who make a melee attack with a non-magical weapon
against a salamander and who roll a natural 1 or 3 take ongoing fire
damage equal to twice the salamander's level unless they drop their
weapon as a free action.

[Extreme Heat Environments]{.underline}

[Adventurer Tier: Burning Tavern]{.underline}

Fire (DC 20 to avoid).

**Burning alive +5 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---2d4 fire damage

Miss: Half damage.

Falling timbers (DC 15 to avoid).

**Crushed +10 vs. AC (adventurers who failed the skill check)**---10
damage

Smoke inhalation (DC 25 to avoid).

**Choking smoke +15 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---2d8 poison damage

*Miss:* Half damage.

[Champion Tier: Forest Fire]{.underline}

Fire (DC 25 to avoid).

**Burning alive +15 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---2d8 fire damage

*Miss:* Half damage.

Smoke inhalation (DC 30 to avoid).

**Choking smoke +20 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---4d8 poison damage

Miss: Half damage.

Heat (DC 20 to avoid).

**Scalding air +10 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---15 fire damage

[Epic Tier: Volcano]{.underline}

Noxious fumes (DC 35 to avoid).

**Noxious fumes +25 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---20 fire damage

Miss: Half damage.

Heat (DC 25 to avoid).

**Scalding air +10 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill
check)**---20 ongoing fire damage

*Miss:* Half damage.

Slow lava flow (DC 20 to avoid).

**Burned away +25 vs. PD (adventurers who failed the skill check)**---50
fire damage and possible loss of limb

*Miss:* Half damage, and permanent scarring.

#### Blueflame Salamander

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 2nd    | **Blueflame tongue +7 vs. AC**---7 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Heat haze aura:* All enemies who start their    | * | 6 |
| Troop    | turn nearby the salamander take 7 fire damage.   | * |   |
|          | All enemies who do not resist fire and who end   |   | 1 |
| E        | their turn nearby the salamander take 7 fire     | * | 3 |
| lemental | damage. Salamanders ignore damage from *heat     | * |   |
|          | haze aura*.                                      | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Enduring flame:* Staggered enemies who are hit  |   |   |
|          | by blueflame tongue also take 3 ongoing fire     | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Doomlantern Salamander

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Fearful flame +8 vs. PD**---14 fire damage and | * | 9 |
| Blocker  | ongoing fire damage equal to the escalation die  | * |   |
|          | value times seven (so the amount keeps going up  |   | 1 |
| E        | as the escalation die goes up, to a maximum of   | * | 5 |
| lemental | 42 ongoing fire damage)                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Special save:* The save against ongoing damage  | D | 6 |
|          | has different effects depending on the roll:     | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *1-10:* Save is failed, and the burning target's |   |   |
|          | closest ally takes 7 fire damage.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *11-15:* Save is successful (ongoing damage      | M |   |
|          | ends), but burning target's closest ally takes 7 | D |   |
|          | fire damage.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *16+:* Save is successful (ongoing damage ends). |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Lure of the flames +8 vs. MD (two nearby or | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies)**---25 psychic damage           | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Natural roll higher than the target's Wisdom    | * |   |
|          | attribute:* Until the target is engaged with the | * |   |
|          | salamander, it will use its move and standard    |   |   |
|          | actions to move and become engaged with the      |   |   |
|          | salamander!                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Ignite:* Any unattended flammable objects       |   |   |
|          | ignite (straw in a stable, the party's tents,    |   |   |
|          | trees, etc.) and nearby liquids boil. Provided   |   |   |
|          | that there was anything flammable in the area    |   |   |
|          | the salamander gets to use its escalating        |   |   |
|          | inferno power.                                   |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Horned Salamander

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: cold                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Glowing horns +13 vs. PD (1d3 attacks)**---30  | * | 3 |
| Troop    | fire damage                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Miss:* 10 fire damage.                          | * | 9 |
| lemental |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Burning gaze +13 vs. PD (two enemies in a   | P | 4 |
|          | rough line, one further away than the            | D | 4 |
|          | other)**---30 ongoing fire damage, hard save     | * | 0 |
|          | (16+) ends                                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Heat haze aura:* All enemies who start their    | * |   |
|          | turn nearby the salamander take 15 fire damage.  | * |   |
|          | All enemies who do not resist fire and who end   | M |   |
|          | their turn nearby the salamander take 15 fire    | D |   |
|          | damage. Salamanders ignore damage from *heat     | * |   |
|          | haze aura*.                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ferrous furnace:* All enemies wearing metal     | H |   |
|          | armor who start their turn nearby the salamander | P |   |
|          | take 2d12 fire damage. All enemies wearing metal | * |   |
|          | armor who do not resist fire and who end their   | * |   |
|          | turn nearby the salamander take 2d12 fire        |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Pyroclastic Salamander

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +17                                  | * | 28 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 12th   | Vulnerability: cold                              | A | 26 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | **Furnace skin +17 vs. PD (each creature engaged | * | 23 |
| Troop    | with the salamander)**---100 fire damage         | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 10 |
| E        | *Natural even miss:* 60 fire damage.             | * | 80 |
| lemental |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural odd miss:* 30 ongoing fire damage.      | P |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | **R: Pyroclastic roar +17 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or  | * |    |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---10 damage and 35 | * |    |
|          | ongoing fire damage                              |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Spreading flames:* Any enemy of the salamander  | D |    |
|          | who is not taking ongoing fire damage, and who   | * |    |
|          | during any point on their turn is next to or     | * |    |
|          | engaged with a creature taking ongoing fire      |   |    |
|          | damage, must roll a save (11+) or take 50        | * |    |
|          | ongoing fire damage.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | P |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Building fire:* Enemies take a penalty to saves | * |    |
|          | against ongoing fire damage equal to the         |   |    |
|          | escalation die.                                  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Igneous aura:* Ranged weapon attacks with       |   |    |
|          | non-magical weapons or non-magical ammunition    |   |    |
|          | against the salamander fail---the missiles       |   |    |
|          | simply burn up mid-air.                          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Shadow Mongoose

#### Shadow Mongoose Destroyer of Fate

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 4th     | **Cloud of claws +9 vs. AC**---7 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* After the current battle is   | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | over, the next time this day that the target      | * |   |
|           | takes ongoing damage, the shadow mongoose gets to |   | 1 |
| Spirit    | make a *destruction of fate* attack against the   | * | 8 |
|           | target.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *\[Triggered action\]* **R: Destruction of fate   | D | 0 |
|           | +9 vs. MD (one target that has been hit twice by  | * |   |
|           | the shadow mongoose this battle)**---The target   | * |   |
|           | rolls their icon dice, and any that come up 1-4   |   |   |
|           | the shadow mongoose steals until the end of the   | * |   |
|           | day. At the start of the next day the target      | * |   |
|           | rolls a save (11+) for each stolen icon           | M |   |
|           | relationship, on a success the icon relationship  | D |   |
|           | die returns to them.                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Crit:* ...and the shadow mongoose steals an item |   |   |
|           | belonging to the target, preferably a magic one   | * |   |
|           | but sometimes the most vital one (a key, a map).  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Shadow's slide:* The shadow mongoose can move    | P |   |
|           | over any solid surface, slithering like a shadow. | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Play dead:* Once per battle the shadow mongoose  |   |   |
|           | may fake being dead. Only magical senses and a DC |   |   |
|           | 25 skill roll from the PC who struck the 'killing |   |   |
|           | blow' will detect that the creature is still      |   |   |
|           | alive. Shadow mongooses like to fake their deaths |   |   |
|           | so that they can escape battle with their stolen  |   |   |
|           | icon relationships. Since shadow anatomy isn't    |   |   |
|           | entirely biological, this ability functions like  |   |   |
|           | fleeing the battle if it succeeds, the PCs can go |   |   |
|           | ahead and blast away at what they think is the    |   |   |
|           | corpse, but they'll be fragging the mongoose's    |   |   |
|           | shadows, not the mongoose itself.                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Trapper:* The shadow mongoose can change shape,  |   |   |
|           | though not mid-battle. Shadow mongoose destroyers |   |   |
|           | of fate use this ability to seem innocuous until  |   |   |
|           | they are ready to strike.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Shadow fate:* When the shadow mongoose dies all  |   |   |
|           | the icon relationship dice that it stole return   |   |   |
|           | to their owners. The person who killed the shadow |   |   |
|           | mongoose gains a magic item that the shadow       |   |   |
|           | mongoose had stolen (though maybe not one that it |   |   |
|           | had stolen from the party).                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Drop the loot:* The shadow mongoose flees the    |   |   |
|           | battle. One nearby enemy of the shadow mongoose   |   |   |
|           | has their icon relationships flip positive to     |   |   |
|           | negative and vise-versa (conflicted relationships |   |   |
|           | are unaffected). This relationship inversion is   |   |   |
|           | temporary, lasting only until the end of the next |   |   |
|           | game session.                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Shadow dancer:* If the shadow mongoose doesn't   |   |   |
|           | attack on its turn it can turn into a flat        |   |   |
|           | shadow, and cannot be intercepted or attacked it  |   |   |
|           | is moving in this form. When it returns to its    |   |   |
|           | normal form, it deals double damage with its next |   |   |
|           | attack, hit or miss.                              |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Shadow Mongoose Subverter of Fate

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 6th    | **Cloud of claws +11 vs. AC**---18 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* 1d12 damage to a nearby      | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | target not engaged with the shadow mongoose.     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Spirit   | **Subversion of fate +11 vs. MD (one target that | * | 0 |
|          | has been hit twice by the shadow mongoose this   | * |   |
|          | battle)**---The shadow mongoose steals the       | P | 1 |
|          | escalation die until the end of its next turn.   | D | 1 |
|          | While the escalation die is stolen, all shadow   | * | 6 |
|          | mongooses and their allies use it, and the       | * |   |
|          | adventurers do not.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Crit:* ...and the shadow mongoose steals an     | * |   |
|          | aspect belonging to the target. The target might | M |   |
|          | lose their age, or lose part of their            | D |   |
|          | appearance, or an outward personality quirk. The | * |   |
|          | character's race, class, attributes etc. remain  | * |   |
|          | intact, as does their core personality and their |   |   |
|          | memories.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Shadow's flight:* The shadow mongoose may       | * |   |
|          | become a thing of dark smoke and shadow, flying  | * |   |
|          | swiftly through the air or through the smallest  |   |   |
|          | cracks.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Play dead:* Once per battle the shadow mongoose |   |   |
|          | may fake being dead. Only magical senses and a   |   |   |
|          | DC 30 skill roll from the PC who struck the      |   |   |
|          | 'killing blow' will detect that the creature is  |   |   |
|          | still alive. Shadow mongooses like to fake their |   |   |
|          | deaths so that they can escape battle with their |   |   |
|          | stolen icon relationships. Since shadow anatomy  |   |   |
|          | isn't entirely biological, this ability          |   |   |
|          | functions like fleeing the battle if it          |   |   |
|          | succeeds, the PCs can go ahead and blast away at |   |   |
|          | what they think is the corpse, but they'll be    |   |   |
|          | fragging the mongoose's shadows, not the         |   |   |
|          | mongoose itself.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Trader:* The shadow mongoose can change shape,  |   |   |
|          | though not mid-battle. Shadow mongoose           |   |   |
|          | subverters sometimes take on non-shadowy visages |   |   |
|          | so that they can set up shop as traders,         |   |   |
|          | offering to take aspects that others do not      |   |   |
|          | want, or selling stolen or traded aspects to     |   |   |
|          | those that do desire them.                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow fate:* When the shadow mongoose dies all |   |   |
|          | the aspects that it stole return to their        |   |   |
|          | owners. Stolen aspects that have been traded     |   |   |
|          | away also return, but slowly. The person who     |   |   |
|          | killed the shadow mongoose gains a random aspect |   |   |
|          | chosen by the GM.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Drop the loot:* The shadow mongoose flees the   |   |   |
|          | battle. One nearby enemy of the shadow mongoose  |   |   |
|          | gains an unwanted aspect. This new unwanted      |   |   |
|          | aspect is temporary, lasting only until the end  |   |   |
|          | of the next game session.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow dancer:* If the shadow mongoose doesn't  |   |   |
|          | attack on its turn it can turn into a flat       |   |   |
|          | shadow, and cannot be intercepted or attacked it |   |   |
|          | is moving in this form. When it returns to its   |   |   |
|          | normal form, it deals double damage with its     |   |   |
|          | next attack, hit or miss.                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Shadow Mongoose Thief of Fate

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 8th    | **Tenebrous claws +13 vs. AC**---24 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* Make a second *tenebrous     | * | 8 |
| Spoiler  | claws* attack as a free action.                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Spirit   | **Theft of fate +13 vs. MD (one target that has  | * | 2 |
|          | been hit twice by the shadow mongoose this       | * |   |
|          | battle)**---The shadow mongoose steals an icon   | P | 1 |
|          | die from the target. The target may not use the  | D | 8 |
|          | stolen icon die, until the shadow mongoose gives | * | 8 |
|          | it back, or the shadow mongoose dies.            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Crit:* ...and the relationship that the         | * |   |
|          | adventurer has with that icon flips from         | * |   |
|          | positive to negative or negative to positive.    | M |   |
|          | Conflicted relationships are unaffected.         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow speed:* As a move action the shadow      | * |   |
|          | mongoose may teleport into engagement with a     | * |   |
|          | target that it missed the previous round.        | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Play dead:* Once per battle the shadow mongoose | * |   |
|          | may fake being dead. Only magical senses and a   | * |   |
|          | DC 35 skill roll from the PC who struck the      |   |   |
|          | 'killing blow' will detect that the creature is  |   |   |
|          | still alive. Shadow mongooses like to fake their |   |   |
|          | deaths so that they can escape battle with their |   |   |
|          | stolen icon relationships. Since shadow anatomy  |   |   |
|          | isn't entirely biological, this ability          |   |   |
|          | functions like fleeing the battle if it          |   |   |
|          | succeeds, the PCs can go ahead and blast away at |   |   |
|          | what they think is the corpse, but they'll be    |   |   |
|          | fragging the mongoose's shadows, not the         |   |   |
|          | mongoose itself.                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Trickster:* The shadow mongoose can change      |   |   |
|          | shape, though not mid-battle. Shadow mongooses   |   |   |
|          | sometimes join adventuring parties as helpful    |   |   |
|          | hirelings, love interests, or local guides to    |   |   |
|          | repeatedly steal icon relationships from         |   |   |
|          | adventurers.                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow fate:* When the shadow mongoose dies all |   |   |
|          | the icon relationship dice that it stole return  |   |   |
|          | to their owners. The person who killed the       |   |   |
|          | shadow mongoose gains 1d3 '5' icon dice results  |   |   |
|          | with a random icon that they do not have a       |   |   |
|          | relationship with OR a 6 with the Trickster Icon |   |   |
|          | if they do not have a relationship with him      |   |   |
|          | (roll 1d3 for relationship type: 1= Negative, 2= |   |   |
|          | Conflicted, 3= Positive).                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Drop the loot:* The shadow mongoose flees the   |   |   |
|          | battle. One nearby enemy of the shadow mongoose  |   |   |
|          | gains an unwanted icon relationship worth 1d3    |   |   |
|          | icon dice. This new relationship is temporary,   |   |   |
|          | lasting only until the end of the next game      |   |   |
|          | session.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Shadow dancer:* If the shadow mongoose doesn't  |   |   |
|          | attack on its turn it can turn into a flat       |   |   |
|          | shadow, and cannot be intercepted or attacked it |   |   |
|          | is moving in this form. When it returns to its   |   |   |
|          | normal form, it deals double damage with its     |   |   |
|          | next attack, hit or miss.                        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Skeleton

[For all skeletons]{.underline}

*Resist weapons 16+:* When a weapon attack targets this creature, the
attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals
half damage.

#### Decrepit Skeleton

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Sword +6 vs. AC**---3 damage                    | * | 4 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Skeletal Hound

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Bite +6 vs. AC**---5 damage                     | * | 3 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The hound leaves teeth in the |   | 1 |
| Undead    | wound; the target takes 5 ongoing damage, and the | * | 3 |
|           | hound takes 1d6 damage.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Chomp chomp chomp:* Enemies with a lower         | D | 4 |
|           | initiative than the hound take a --5 penalty to   | * |   |
|           | disengage checks against it.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Skilled intercept 11+:* Once per round, an       | * |   |
|           | engaged skeletal hound can attempt to pop free    | * |   |
|           | and intercept an enemy moving past it. Roll a     | M |   |
|           | normal save; on 11+, it succeeds.                 | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Skeleton Archer

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Jabby bones +5 vs. AC**---4 damage              | * | 4 |
| Archer    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Shortbow +7 vs. AC**---6 damage              |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Skeleton Warrior

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Spear +8 vs. AC**---6 damage                    | * | 4 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Blackamber Skeletal Legionnaire

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Shortsword +10 vs. AC**---14 damage             | * | 5 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target moves down 1d3 points   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | in initiative order, to a minimum of 1.           | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even miss:* 5 damage.                    | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | **R: Javelin +8 vs. AC**---10 damage              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Press advantage:* The legionnaire deals +1d8     |   |   |
|           | damage with its attacks against enemies that have | * |   |
|           | a lower initiative than it.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Spell Golem

#### Spell Golem Warder

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | **Mighty slam +11 vs. AC**---18 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target is dazed until the end  | * | 3 |
| Blocker   | of its next turn.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Construct | *\[Special trigger\]* **Empowered slam +12 vs.    | * | 8 |
|           | AC**---27 damage                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The warder pops free from     | D | 0 |
|           | each enemy engaged with it and can move as a free | * |   |
|           | action, usually next to an ally.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Limited golem immunity:* A golem warder can't be | * |   |
|           | dazed, weakened, confused, or made vulnerable.    | * |   |
|           | Ongoing damage doesn't harm it either, unless     | M |   |
|           | it's acid, fire, or lightning.                    | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Protect the master:* While the golem warder is   | * |   |
|           | next to an ally, once per round when a melee      |   |   |
|           | attack targets that ally, it can try to intercept | * |   |
|           | the attack as a free action. Roll an easy save    | * |   |
|           | (6+); if it succeeds, the warder becomes the      | H |   |
|           | target of the attack instead.                     | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Spellward:* Twice per battle when a spell attack | * |   |
|           | hits a nearby ally, the warder can have the       |   |   |
|           | attack target itself instead as an interrupt      |   |   |
|           | action. If the attack roll doesn't hit against    |   |   |
|           | the warder's defenses, the attack misses.         |   |   |
|           | Otherwise, the warder takes all damage and        |   |   |
|           | effects of the spell for that ally. When the      |   |   |
|           | warder takes damage this way, it can make an      |   |   |
|           | *empowered slam* attack during its next turn.     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Golem warders are usually linked to a master      |   |   |
|           | through a ritual. Unless instructed otherwise,    |   |   |
|           | they use *spellward* only to protect that master. |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Hard to destroy:* Only natural even spell attack |   |   |
|           | rolls deal damage to the golem.                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Spell Golem Mage Hunter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Negating strike +14 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---40  | A |   |
| level    | damage, and the target is hampered until the end | C | 2 |
|          | of its next turn                                 | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural roll is above target's Intelligence:*   |   | 1 |
| C        | The target is hampered (hard save ends, 16+)     | * | 9 |
| onstruct | instead.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 3 |
|          | **R: Ray of disjunction +14 vs. PD**---70        | D | 0 |
|          | damage, and the target is hampered (save ends)   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* 1d2 random magic items on the     |   |   |
|          | target are also affected. One-shot items like    | * |   |
|          | potions and oils are ruined; true magic items    | * |   |
|          | lose their default bonus and any powers until    | M |   |
|          | the end of the battle.                           | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/battle.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited golem immunity:* A golem warder can't   | * |   |
|          | be dazed, weakened, confused, or made            | * |   |
|          | vulnerable. Ongoing damage doesn't harm it       | H |   |
|          | either, unless it's acid, fire, or lightning.    | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Spell deflection:* When a spell attack targets  | * |   |
|          | the mage hunter, roll a d20. On a 1--7, the      |   |   |
|          | attack or effect hits normally. On an 8--15, the |   |   |
|          | attack or effect is negated. On a 16+, the       |   |   |
|          | attack or effect is reflected back at the caster |   |   |
|          | as if that enemy had been targeted instead of    |   |   |
|          | the golem (so it must overcome defenses and      |   |   |
|          | resistances, as normal).                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Made of tougher stuff:* Instead of wood,        |   |   |
|          | stronger materials were used to create the       |   |   |
|          | golem, such as crystal or brass. This golem is   |   |   |
|          | non-organic and has golem immunity (so ongoing   |   |   |
|          | acid, fire, and lightning don't harm it).        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Stirge

#### Stirge

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 0 level   | **Claws +7 vs. AC**---2 damage, and the stirge    | A |   |
|           | can make a *draining probe* attack against the    | C | 1 |
| Troop     | target during its next turn if it's still engaged | * | 4 |
|           | with the target                                   | * |   |
| Beast     |                                                   |   | 1 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Draining probe +7 vs. AC  | * | 0 |
|           | (one enemy hit by *claws* last turn)**---5        | * |   |
|           | damage, and 5 ongoing damage                      | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | *Flight:* Stirges fly well. Also, the pitch of    | * |   |
|           | their wings is high and thin, allowing a stirge   | * |   |
|           | to get very close without tipping off its prey.   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *One and done:* After hitting a living creature   | D |   |
|           | that has blood with its *draining probe* attack,  | * |   |
|           | the stirge heals 5 hit points and will use its    | * |   |
|           | next turn to move, fleeing to the hive to feed    |   |   |
|           | the stirgelings...and to alert the hive that      | * |   |
|           | there is an easy meal nearby. A new full-strength | * |   |
|           | stirge enters the battle during the next round on | H |   |
|           | the same initiative count.                        | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Archer Stirge

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 1st     | **Serrated claws +7 vs. AC**---4 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Barbed stinger +9 vs. AC (one nearby         | * | 4 |
| Archer    | enemy)**---3 damage, and 3 ongoing damage         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural 16+:* One stirge ally engaged with the   | * | 2 |
|           | target can make a melee attack against it as a    | * |   |
|           | free action.                                      | P | 2 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | *Flight:* The archer stirge flies faster and      | * |   |
|           | higher than a normal stirge, but on louder wings. | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Cobbler Stirge

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Claws +7 vs. AC**---6 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Gooey bloody spray +7 vs. PD (1d4 nearby     | * | 4 |
| Blocker   | enemies)**---5 damage                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target is stuck   | * | 2 |
|           | (save ends).                                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The cobbler stirge     | D | 0 |
|           | takes 3 damage.                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Painful flight:* The cobbler has stubby          |   |   |
|           | ill-proportioned wings and takes 1d6 damage at    | * |   |
|           | the end of each round that it flies during        | * |   |
|           | battle.                                           | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Stirgelings

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 0 level   | **Claws +5 vs. AC**---The effect depends on the   | A |   |
|           | roll                                              | C | 1 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * | 3 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* 2 damage.                      | * |   |
| Beast     |                                                   |   | 9 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Choose one effect, and then   | * |   |
|           | the stirgeling mob takes 4 damage (killing this   | * | 4 |
|           | creature first).                                  | P |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Regular stirgeling:* The target takes 3 damage,  | * |   |
|           | and 3 ongoing damage.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Archer stirgeling:* The target takes 6 damage.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Cobbler stirgeling:* The target takes 3 damage   | M |   |
|           | and is stuck until end of its next turn.          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* They aren't strong fliers but they are  | * |   |
|           | quick and agile.                                  |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Soul Flenser

#### Soul Flenser

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 9th    | **Soul flensing tentacles +14 vs. PD**---30      | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | *Natural even hit, or any hit against a          | * |   |
|          | weakened, stunned, or confused target:* Randomly |   | 2 |
| Ab       | select one of the target's limited-use powers or | * | 3 |
| erration | spells. The soul flenser flenses it away,        | * |   |
|          | removing it from the target until that creature  | P | 1 |
|          | regains it via a successful *Connection to the   | D | 8 |
|          | Oversoul* (see below).                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 3, 6, or 9:* The target is confused     |   |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Soul blast +14 vs. MD (1d4 nearby enemies   | M |   |
|          | in a group)**---35 psychic damage                | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is weakened (save | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* If the target is already      | * |   |
|          | weakened, it's also stunned until end of its     | H |   |
|          | next turn.                                       | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 3, 6, or 9:* The target is confused     | * |   |
|          | (save ends).                                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Connection to the Oversoul:* When a creature    |   |   |
|          | slays a soul flenser, it can roll a hard save    |   |   |
|          | (16+). If it succeeds, the creature regains one  |   |   |
|          | power it has had *flensed* away.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Intellect fortress:* When an enemy misses the   |   |   |
|          | soul flenser with an attack against MD, that     |   |   |
|          | attacker takes half the miss damage, if any.     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Underkraken teleport:* A soul flenser that has  |   |   |
|          | successfully flensed at least once can (and      |   |   |
|          | usually will, provided some of its enemies are   |   |   |
|          | confused, weakened, or stunned) use a standard   |   |   |
|          | action to prepare itself to teleport. Once it    |   |   |
|          | does this, during its next turn it can use a     |   |   |
|          | move action to teleport back to its home         |   |   |
|          | underkraken, no matter how distant, leaving the  |   |   |
|          | battle behind. Soul flensers fighting beside or  |   |   |
|          | within their underkraken can't use this ability; |   |   |
|          | they're already home.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flensing escalator:* The soul flenser gains an  |   |   |
|          | attack bonus equal to the escalation die against |   |   |
|          | creatures that have had one or more powers       |   |   |
|          | flensed away.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Oversoul control:* While confused by a soul     |   |   |
|          | flenser's effect, a creature that has had a      |   |   |
|          | power flensed away can use and re-use that       |   |   |
|          | limited power against their erstwhile allies, if |   |   |
|          | the GM sees how to use the power in a useful     |   |   |
|          | way.                                             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### The Flensed

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 9th     | **Fists, claws, or shoddy weapons +13 vs.         | A |   |
| level     | AC**---20 damage, or 40 damage against a target   | C | 2 |
|           | that currently has one or more powers *flensed*   | * | 0 |
| Mook      | away.                                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| A         | *Connection to the Oversoul:* When a creature     | * | 2 |
| berration | slays one of the flensed, it can roll a hard save | * |   |
|           | (16+). If it succeeds, the creature regains one   | P | 6 |
|           | power it had *flensed* away.                      | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flensing escalator:* The Flensed gains an attack | * |   |
|           | bonus equal to the escalation die against         |   |   |
|           | creatures that have had one or more powers        | * |   |
|           | flensed away.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Specter

[Nastier Specials for all specters]{.underline}

*Aura of loss:* The first time during a battle the specter is staggered,
each nearby enemy with 30 hp or fewer is hampered until the end of the
specter's next turn. (9th level dread specter affects enemies with 60
hp or fewer.)

*Healing drain:* When an enemy engaged with a specter heals, it heals
only half the normal hit points, and the specter heals the other half
(round down).

*Spectral evasion:* Once per battle as a free action when an enemy
attacks the specter, it can force the attacker to reroll the attack and
use the result the specter prefers.

#### Specter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 6th    | **Icy, life-draining touch +10 vs. PD**---30     | A |   |
| level    | negative energy damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit or miss:* Each enemy engaged   | * |   |
|          | with the specter (including the target) takes 4  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | negative energy damage.                          | * | 9 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Deathly stare +10 vs. MD**---20 negative    | P | 1 |
|          | energy damage                                    | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Punishing aura:* When an enemy attacks the      | * |   |
|          | specter and misses, it takes 8 negative energy   |   |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Wrack and ruin:* While a specter is in the      | M |   |
|          | battle, the PCs don't add the escalation die to  | D |   |
|          | attack rolls, but it does.                       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dread Specter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 9th    | **Icy, life-draining touch +12 vs. PD**---110    | A |   |
| level    | negative energy damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit or miss:* Each enemy engaged   | * |   |
|          | with the specter (including the target) takes 20 |   | 2 |
| Undead   | negative energy damage.                          | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Deathly stare +12 vs. MD (up to 2 nearby    | P | 5 |
|          | enemies)**---75 negative energy damage           | D | 5 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Phantom movement:* As a move action when the    | * |   |
|          | escalation die is odd, the specter can teleport  |   |   |
|          | anywhere nearby, dematerializing from its        | * |   |
|          | location to materialize in another.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Punishing aura:* When an enemy attacks the      | D |   |
|          | specter and misses, it takes 24 negative energy  | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Wrack and ruin:* While a specter is in the      | * |   |
|          | battle, the PCs don't add the escalation die to  | * |   |
|          | attack rolls, but it does.                       | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Death grasp:* At the start of each of the       |   |   |
|          | specter's turns, if any enemy in the battle has  |   |   |
|          | 60 hp or fewer, the specter can make a *death    |   |   |
|          | grasp* attack against one of those enemies as a  |   |   |
|          | free action. Be sure to let players see this one |   |   |
|          | coming.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **C: Death grasp +14 vs. MD (one nearby enemy    |   |   |
|          | with 60 hp or fewer)**---60 negative energy      |   |   |
|          | damage                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Star-Masks

[Champion Tier: Star-Masks & Cultists]{.underline}

To change things up, here are some additional nastier-special abilities
to give to the star-mask cultists and puppets the PCs face. The
abilities key off who the star-mask cultist was before they were taken
by the mask.

[Dwarf (or maybe Half-Orc)]{.underline}

*\[Group ability\] Stronger than stone:* Once per battle, a staggered
dwarf heals to full health as a free action. No matter how many dwarves
there are in the battle, only one can use this ability.

[Elf (or maybe Halfling)]{.underline}

*\[Group ability\] Elf-like grace:* Once per battle, an elf can take a
second standard action during its turn. No matter how many elves there
are in the battle, only one can use this ability.

[Human (or maybe Half Orc)]{.underline}

*\[Group ability\] Sudden cunning:* Once per battle, a human can turn
one of its missed attacks into a hit, or a hit into a critical hit. No
matter how many humans there are in the battle, only one can use this
ability.

[Halfling or Gnome (or maybe Elf)]{.underline}

*\[Group ability\] Quicker than that:* Once per battle, a halfling or
gnome can turn a hit against it into a miss, or can ignore the miss
effects of an attack against it. No matter how many halflings or gnomes
there are in the battle, only one can use this ability.

[Epic Tier: Star-Mask Brains]{.underline}

The epic tier star-mask creatures are all star-mask brains. Star mask
brains warp the reality around them, creating odd effects that can
surprise the unwary

[Star-Mask Brain Effects]{.underline}

At the start of each round in a battle with one or more star-mask
brains, roll a d10 to see what happens. Some effects are immediate,
others last the entire round:

**1. Consumption.** One brain can consume any lower-level xombie,
star-mask, or brain ally to heal back to half hit points if it's
staggered, or to full health if not staggered. If there are no allies
present, 1d4 xombies or cultists show up (note, they may be too low
level to have any effect except to be swiftly eliminated by the PCs or
consumed in a later round).

**2. De-escalating illusion.** The star-mask brain blasts the minds of
the adventurers with illusions---the escalation die decreases by 1 (to a
minimum of 0).

**3. Delusions.** The star-mask brain messes with the adventurers'
perceptions. Once this round as a free action, the brain can roll a save
to avoid a ranged attack that hits it. If it succeeds, the attack misses
instead. If it rolls 16+ on the save, the attack is redirected and
automatically hits a nearby enemy other than the attacker of the brain's
choice.

**4. Mental empowerment.** Each star-mask brain or cultist in the battle
gains a +2 bonus to saves and MD this round.

**5. Intrusive thoughts.** The star-mask brain is thinking hard about
the characters---each PC takes 2d12 psychic damage.

**6. Magical flux.** When the PCs use spell attacks or other magic
attacks, they must roll twice and use the lower result.

**7. Magical reflux.** When a PC casts a spell this round, they take
2d20 force damage.

**8. Matter warp.** Everything shudders and twists for a moment, and
each engaged creature pops free from engagement.

**9. Possession.** The hive mind possesses a PC, who is automatically
confused until the end of their next turn. Each adventurer can be
confused only once per battle from this effect.

**10. Steal the momentum.** The star-mask hive mind temporarily steals
the escalation die; this round, so the monsters get the benefit of the
die and the adventurers don't.

#### Fast Xombie

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 0 level   | **Stumbling rush +5 vs. AC**---4 damage, and the  | A |   |
|           | xombie pops free from each enemy engaged with it  | C | 1 |
| Spoiler   | and can move to engage a nearby or faraway enemy  | * | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
| A         | *Natural even miss:* The xombie pops free from    |   | 1 |
| berration | the target and can move to engage a nearby or     | * | 4 |
|           | faraway enemy.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 2 |
|           | *Natural odd miss:* The xombie pops free from the | D | 0 |
|           | target.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Unnatural leap:* While the escalation die is 1   |   |   |
|           | or below, the fast xombie can engage a nearby or  | * |   |
|           | faraway enemy as a move action.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     | * |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   |   |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Meteorite Xombie

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 1st     | **Decaying fists +6 vs. AC**---3 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The attack does double damage, but | * | 1 |
| Mook      | the xombie takes 1d6 damage.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| A         | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Vomit tentacles +6 vs.   | * | 5 |
| berration | PD (1d3 nearby enemies in a group)**---4 damage   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Group ability:* For every four meteorite xombies | D |   |
|           | in the battle (round up), one of them can use     | * |   |
|           | *vomit tentacles* once during the battle.         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Resist fire 16+:* When a fire attack targets     | M |   |
|           | this creature, the attacker must roll a natural   | D |   |
|           | 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals half      | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Xombie Egg Swarm

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Swarm +7 vs. AC**---5 damage                    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Puppeteer tentacles +7   | * | 2 |
| Mook      | vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---The target makes a  | * |   |
|           | basic attack against a target of the xombie egg   |   | 1 |
| A         | swarm's choice                                    | * | 6 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* The target is immune to puppeteer         | P | 9 |
|           | abilities for the rest of this battle and until   | D |   |
|           | the end of the next battle.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Swarm rush:* Once per battle as a move action,   |   |   |
|           | the egg swarm can pop free from each enemy        | * |   |
|           | engaged with it and take two move actions, but it | * |   |
|           | must finish its move engaged with an enemy.       | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every four xombie egg swarms | * |   |
|           | in the battle (round up), one of them can use     | * |   |
|           | *puppeteer tentacles* once during the battle.     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Corpse puppet:* If there is at least one intact  | P |   |
|           | corpse in the battle (say a star-mask cultist     | * |   |
|           | died), then once per battle part of the xombie    | * |   |
|           | egg swarm can burrow into it as a quick action,   |   |   |
|           | and it rises as a skull crab xombie at the start  |   |   |
|           | of the next round (roll initiative and give the   |   |   |
|           | new xombie a +10 initiative bonus for the shock   |   |   |
|           | of its arrival).                                  |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Skull Crab Xombie

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Bite or butt +7 vs. AC**---7 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Scrabbling tentacles +7 vs. PD**---5 damage     | * | 2 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The skull crab has burrowed   |   | 1 |
| A         | its tentacles into the target's flesh; the target | * | 6 |
| berration | takes a --1 penalty to all d20 rolls (save ends). | * |   |
|           | Until the target saves, whenever it moves the     | P | 3 |
|           | skull crab comes with it, and the crab will       | D | 6 |
|           | continue to bite the target.                      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Each failed save:* The penalty to all d20 rolls  |   |   |
|           | increases by --1 (first failed save = --2         | * |   |
|           | penalty, etc.)                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Meat puppet:* If a creature fails three          | D |   |
|           | consecutive saves against the *scrabbling         | * |   |
|           | tentacles* effect, attacks against the skull crab | * |   |
|           | deal half damage to it and half to that creature  |   |   |
|           | as the crab burrows deep. The effect lasts until  | * |   |
|           | the creature saves.                               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Sudden leap:* Once per battle as a move action,  | P |   |
|           | the skull crab can engage a nearby or far away    | * |   |
|           | enemy.                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *New host:* When an enemy making saves against    |   |   |
|           | the scrambling tentacles effect drops to 0 hp or  |   |   |
|           | below, the skull crab eggs rush out of its skull  |   |   |
|           | and the crab dies. That enemy must start making   |   |   |
|           | last gasp saves in addition to any death saves,   |   |   |
|           | with it turning into a xombie on the fourth       |   |   |
|           | failure.                                          |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Xombie Spiders

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Claws that burrow under your skin +8 vs.        | A |   |
| level     | PD**---8 damage                                   | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| Blocker   | *Natural even hit:* The xombie spider is under    | * |   |
|           | the target's skin. The target takes 8 damage if   |   | 1 |
| A         | it disengages from the spider.                    | * | 5 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Chittering call +7 vs. MD (one nearby or     | P | 4 |
|           | faraway enemy)**---The target can't willingly     | D | 6 |
|           | engage a xombie spider or any other spider (save  | * |   |
|           | ends). Creatures immune to fear are immune to     | * |   |
|           | this effect.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action. In     | * |   |
|           | addition, once a creature has saved against the   | M |   |
|           | effect, it can't be targeted by *chittering call* | D |   |
|           | attacks again this battle.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **Tendril web +7 vs. PD (1d3  |   |   |
|           | enemies engaged with it)**---The target is stuck  | * |   |
|           | (save ends); until the target saves, the xombie   | * |   |
|           | spider gains a +1 attack bonus against it         | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every three star-mask        | * |   |
|           | spiders in the battle (round up), one of them can | * |   |
|           | use *tendril web* once during the battle.         |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Brain-Absorber Xombie

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Tentacle smash +9 vs. AC**---22 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **Brain-ripping tentacles +9  | * | 6 |
| Caster    | vs. PD**---14 damage                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| A         | *Natural even hit:* The target loses a recovery,  | * | 0 |
| berration | OR it must immediately roll a save; if it fails,  | * |   |
|           | it's confused (save ends) (target's choice).      | P | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Mass confusion +9 vs. MD | * |   |
|           | (1d3 nearby enemies)**---14 psychic damage, OR if | * |   |
|           | the target is the first enemy this attack hits    |   |   |
|           | each round, it must make a basic attack against   | * |   |
|           | an ally of its choice.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Psychic crush +9 vs. MD  | D |   |
|           | (one nearby or far away enemy)**---14 psychic     | * |   |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* 10 ongoing psychic    | * |   |
|           | damage.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two brain-absorber     | P |   |
|           | xombies in the battle (round up), one of them can | * |   |
|           | use *brain-ripping tentacles*, *mass confusion*,  | * |   |
|           | or *psychic crush* once during the battle.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Harvest:* When the brain-absorber xombie is next |   |   |
|           | to an unconscious or helpless living enemy at the |   |   |
|           | start of its turn, it can use its full turn of    |   |   |
|           | actions (quick, move, and standard) to remove the |   |   |
|           | creature's brain and add it to its collection.    |   |   |
|           | When it does, that enemy dies and the xombie      |   |   |
|           | heals to full hit points.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Re-broadcaster:* Once per battle, the            |   |   |
|           | brain-absorber xombie can take no actions during  |   |   |
|           | its turn to allow 1d4 nearby lower-level allies   |   |   |
|           | to take an extra standard action during their     |   |   |
|           | next turns.                                       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Scuttling Star-Mask

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 5th     | **Strangling tentacles +9 vs. PD**---5 damage,    | A |   |
| level     | and 5 ongoing damage (damage also ends if the     | C | 1 |
|           | target is no longer engaged with the star-mask)   | * | 5 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Group ability\]* **C: Suffocating thoughts +10 |   | 1 |
| A         | vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---Until the end of    | * | 9 |
| berration | the battle, if the target drops to 0 hp or below, | * |   |
|           | it rejoins the fight as a 5th level star-mask   | P | 1 |
|           | cultist. Converted player character star-mask     | D | 9 |
|           | cultists can be freed from their masks as a       | * |   |
|           | standard action by a character next to them. Use  | * |   |
|           | cultist stats and ignore the PC's hit points and  |   |   |
|           | normal attacks and powers; some hand waving may   | * |   |
|           | be necessary here, be forgiving if the PCs spend  | * |   |
|           | serious resources to deal with the problem during | M |   |
|           | combat.                                           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every four star-masks in the | * |   |
|           | battle (round up), one of them can use            |   |   |
|           | *suffocating thoughts* once during the battle.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Leap:* When the escalation die is odd, the       | H |   |
|           | star-mask can move and engage a nearby enemy as a | P |   |
|           | quick action.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Cultist

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | **Club or other weapon +10 vs. AC**---14 damage   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **R: Bow +10 vs. AC**---18 damage                 | * | 5 |
| Archer    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Psychic blast +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby enemies |   | 1 |
| A         | or 1d3 faraway enemies in a group)**---6 psychic  | * | 7 |
| berration | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | *Limited use:* 1/round, as a quick action when    | D | 8 |
|           | the escalation die is odd.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Group ability:* For every two star-mask cultists |   |   |
|           | in the battle (round up), one of them can use     | * |   |
|           | *coordinated attack* once as a free action during | * |   |
|           | the battle.                                       | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Coordinated attack (group):* Until the start of  | * |   |
|           | its next turn, the star-mask cultist gains a +2   | * |   |
|           | attack bonus against enemies that are engaged     |   |   |
|           | with the cultist's allies.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *New host:* When this cultist drops to 0 hp, a    | * |   |
|           | new scuttling star-mask joins the battle (in the  | * |   |
|           | same location as the dead cultist) and            |   |   |
|           | immediately makes a *suffocating thoughts* attack |   |   |
|           | as a free action against the closest enemy.       |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Cult Leader

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 6th    | **Iron-shod staff +11 vs. AC**---35 damage       | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Mark of the stars +11 vs. PD**---21 psychic    | * | 5 |
| Leader   | damage, and the target is marked with a glowing  | * |   |
|          | rune (hard save ends, 16+). While the target is  |   | 1 |
| Ab       | marked this way, the cult leader's allies gain a | * | 9 |
| erration | +1 attack bonus and +3 damage bonus against it.  | * |   |
|          | A creature can have only one mark at a time.     | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 8 |
|          | **R: Psychic domination +11 vs. MD**---18        | * | 0 |
|          | psychic damage, and 18 ongoing psychic damage    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* One dead (or         | * |   |
|          | unconscious or otherwise out of the fight)       | * |   |
|          | star-mask cultist, dead star-mask cult leader,   | M |   |
|          | or dead star-mask brute becomes a living         | D |   |
|          | scuttling star-mask mook.                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Cult Puppet

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 6th     | **Tentacles and fists +11 vs. AC**---18 damage    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Tentacle whip +13 vs. PD**---15 damage, and  | * | 6 |
| Troop     | the target pops free from each enemy engaged with | * |   |
|           | it and is pulled into engagement with the         |   | 2 |
| A         | star-mask puppet                                  | * | 1 |
| berration |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Psychic coordination:* For every star-mask       | P | 8 |
|           | puppet engaged with an enemy, other star-masks    | D | 0 |
|           | not engaged with that enemy gain a +1 attack      | * |   |
|           | bonus against that enemy (maximum +4).            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Wall-crawler:* The star-mask puppet can use oily | * |   |
|           | tentacles to climb on ceilings and walls as       | * |   |
|           | easily as it moves on the ground.                 | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Psychic chaff:* Star-mask parasites that create  | * |   |
|           | puppets quickly die and fade to dust after their  | * |   |
|           | puppet drops to 0 hp. After a battle against      |   |   |
|           | star-mask puppets, each character must roll a     | * |   |
|           | hard save (16+). If they fail, they remember only | * |   |
|           | the host body and not the white mask and black    | H |   |
|           | tentacles that were embedded in its flesh. Even   | P |   |
|           | characters who succeed find it hard to keep the   | * |   |
|           | memory of the star-mask in mind afterward,        | * |   |
|           | potentially making for confusing battles against  |   |   |
|           | these puppets.                                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Brainburster

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 7th    | **Mind-linking tentacles +12 vs. PD (1d3         | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---The target is confused until the    | C | 2 |
|          | end of its next turn                             | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 14 psychic damage.                       |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 4 |
| erration | **C: Astral tentacles +12 vs. MD (1d3 closest    | * |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemies)**---10 psychic        | P | 1 |
|          | damage, and the target is dazed (save ends)      | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is confused (save | * |   |
|          | ends) instead of dazed.                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Hit against a target that has been confused and | * |   |
|          | saved against it this battle:* 20 psychic        | M |   |
|          | damage, but no dazed or confused effect.         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Brute

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Warped antler, hoof, or claw +12 vs. AC**---50 | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| Wrecker  | **Slamming crush +12 vs. AC**---28 damage, and   | * |   |
|          | 20 ongoing damage                                |   | 2 |
| Ab       |                                                  | * | 0 |
| erration | *Natural 16+:* The star-mask brute can make a    | * |   |
|          | *throw* attack against the target as a free      | P | 2 |
|          | action.                                          | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **Throw +16 vs. PD**---The target is thrown      | * |   |
|          | faraway, takes 20 damage, and is weakened (easy  |   |   |
|          | save ends, 6+).                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The target pops free from the brute.     | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Floating Brain

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +14                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 10th    | **C: Psychic pulse +14 vs. MD (one nearby         | A |   |
| level     | enemy)**---18 psychic damage, and the target is   | C | 2 |
|           | hampered until the end of the floating brain's    | * | 0 |
| Mook      | next turn                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 2 |
| A         | *If the target was already hampered:* The         | * | 4 |
| berration | floating brain's crit range expands to 11+ for    | * |   |
|           | the attack.                                       | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           | *Group ability:* For every three star-mask        | * |   |
|           | floating brains in the battle (round up), one of  | * |   |
|           | them can use *psychic puppetry* once during the   |   |   |
|           | battle.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Psychic puppetry (group):* When a star-mask      | M |   |
|           | floating brain scores a critical hit with         | D |   |
|           | *psychic pulse*, instead of dealing extra damage, | * |   |
|           | the target becomes confused (save ends) instead   | * |   |
|           | of hampered.                                      |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Hovering brain:* The brain uses telepathic       | * |   |
|           | energy to float in the air at about head height.  | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *Lost opportunity:* Star-mask floating brains     | * |   |
|           | can't make opportunity attacks.                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Brain Zealot

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 12th   | **Phasing tentacles (automatic hit against each  | A |   |
| level    | enemy engaged with it)**---30 damage, and the    | C | 2 |
|          | target pops free from it                         | * | 7 |
| Archer   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Phased blast +17 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---25  |   | 2 |
| Ab       | force damage, and 25 ongoing damage (hard save   | * | 3 |
| erration | ends 16+, or using a standard action to restore  | * |   |
|          | equilibrium also ends)                           | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Warpwalk:* While the escalation die is odd, the | * | 0 |
|          | star-mask brain zealot can't be intercepted,     | * |   |
|          | doesn't suffer opportunity attacks, and takes    |   |   |
|          | only half damage from attacks that target AC or  | * |   |
|          | PD.                                              | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Mask Omnipotent Brain

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 12th   | **Invasive tentacles +17 vs. AC (1d3 nearby      | A |   |
| level    | enemies)**---30 damage, and 30 ongoing psychic   | C | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | * | 2 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Target fails a save against the ongoing psychic |   | 2 |
| Ab       | damage:* At the start of the target's next turn, | * | 8 |
| erration | it must use its move action to engage the        | * |   |
|          | omnipotent brain. It won't take opportunity      | P | 9 |
|          | attacks to do so, instead trying to disengage.   | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **C: Psionic supremacy +17 vs. MD (one nearby or | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---35 ongoing psychic damage     |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Aftereffect:* When the target saves against the | * |   |
|          | ongoing damage, it must choose one: it makes a   | M |   |
|          | basic attack against itself or an ally with its  | D |   |
|          | next standard action, OR it becomes weakened     | * |   |
|          | (--4 to attacks and defenses) until the end of   | * |   |
|          | its next turn.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 2/round, as separate quick        | * |   |
|          | actions.                                         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Miss:* The brain heals 50 hp.                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 1--5:* The target is immune to the      |   |   |
|          | aftereffect of *psionic supremacy* until the end |   |   |
|          | of the battle.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Crawling brain:* The brain can crawl about on   |   |   |
|          | tentacles but prefers to use its telekinetic     |   |   |
|          | grasp to move enemies toward it or its allies.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Psychic contamination:* Creatures engaged with  |   |   |
|          | the star-mask omnipotent brain that have 120 hp  |   |   |
|          | or fewer can't target the omnipotent brain with  |   |   |
|          | attacks.                                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Telekinetic grasp:* As a move action the brain  |   |   |
|          | can move an ally or enemy, causing them to fly   |   |   |
|          | about. An enemy can roll a save to avoid being   |   |   |
|          | moved against its will. If it succeeds, there's  |   |   |
|          | no effect. Enemies hurled against solid objects  |   |   |
|          | or other allies take 2d20 damage, or possibly    |   |   |
|          | more if hurled into dangerous terrain.           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Absorb:* When an enemy engaged with the         |   |   |
|          | star-mask brain omnipotent rolls a natural 1--5  |   |   |
|          | on a disengage check, it's absorbed into the     |   |   |
|          | omnipotent brain's flesh. Absorbed characters    |   |   |
|          | are stuck, weakened, and move with the           |   |   |
|          | omnipotent (hard save ends all, 16+). Creatures  |   |   |
|          | can also be freed from an omnipotent brain's     |   |   |
|          | flesh with a DC 30 skill check as a standard     |   |   |
|          | action. If the check fails by 5 or more, the     |   |   |
|          | assisting ally is also now absorbed with the     |   |   |
|          | same effects.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Perceptual warp:* When an enemy targets the     |   |   |
|          | omnipotent brain with a ranged attack and rolls  |   |   |
|          | a natural 1--5, it must reroll the attack        |   |   |
|          | against an ally engaged with the brain, if any,  |   |   |
|          | as if it had fumbled.                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Psychic command:* The omnipotent brain can use  |   |   |
|          | a standard action to allow a nearby ally to make |   |   |
|          | an attack as a free action with a +4 attack      |   |   |
|          | bonus. If the ally misses it takes 1d8 damage    |   |   |
|          | and the brain heals 50 hp.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Star-Brain Dungeon Heart

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 30 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 14th   | **C: Mutagenic emanations +22 vs. AC (each       | A | 24 |
| level    | enemy)**---80 ongoing damage                     | C |    |
|          |                                                  | * | 28 |
| Wrecker  | *Instant rebirth:* Any enemy that dies due to    | * |    |
|          | ongoing damage from *mutagenic emanations*       |   | 12 |
| Ab       | instantly rejoins the fight as a star-mask brain | * | 00 |
| erration | zealot allied to the dungeon heart.              | * |    |
|          |                                                  | P |    |
|          | **C: Sickly sweet feelings +22 vs. MD (one       | D |    |
|          | nearby or faraway enemy)**---Until the end of    | * |    |
|          | the battle, the next time the target drops to 0  | * |    |
|          | hp or below, the target recovers with temporary  |   |    |
|          | hit points equal to its normal maximum hit       | * |    |
|          | points, but is now an ally to the dungeon heart. | * |    |
|          | It is a standard action to free an ally next to  | M |    |
|          | you from their *sickly sweet feelings*, but      | D |    |
|          | doing so makes them lose their temporary hp (at  | * |    |
|          | which point they'll collapse again unless they   | * |    |
|          | have been somehow healed above 0 hit points).    |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Mental scream:* The first time the dungeon      | P |    |
|          | heart is staggered, it makes the following       | * |    |
|          | attack as a free action:                         | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **R: Mind-erasing blast +22 vs. MD (the enemy    |   |    |
|          | that staggered the dungeon heart)**---200        |   |    |
|          | psychic damage                                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Lost opportunity:* The dungeon heart can't make |   |    |
|          | opportunity attacks.                             |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Neuralogenic:* The brain doesn't move about by  |   |    |
|          | itself, but it does infect nearby matter,        |   |    |
|          | turning wherever it is into more of itself: if   |   |    |
|          | you are close enough to fight the brain, you are |   |    |
|          | de facto engaged with it, and will be affected   |   |    |
|          | by its *mutagenic emanations* attack.            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Flesh absorption:* When an enemy fails to save  |   |    |
|          | against the ongoing damage from *mutagenic       |   |    |
|          | emanations*, the dungeon heart heals 20 hp.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Soul drain:* Enemies killed by the dungeon      |   |    |
|          | heart become mindless living husks with no       |   |    |
|          | resurrection or healing possible---their soul is |   |    |
|          | gone. (Of course, there may be some miraculous   |   |    |
|          | quest for healing magic that could restore       |   |    |
|          | them.)                                           |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Star-Mask Host Template

Star-mask cultists can range from those who are simple followers who are
unaware of the cult's true purpose, to fully controlled puppets, to
individuals who welcome their star-mask "partners."

A star-mask brute normally begins life as a large beast or a dragon, but
becomes host to dozens of star-masks. The star-masks warp and mutate
their host, and eventually it is no longer recognizable.

To convert a regular monster or NPC to a star-mask host, give it a
couple abilities from those listed under psychic powers, physical
warping, and tentacles. In addition, increase its attack bonus by +4.
The base creature's level increases by 1 for purposes of building
battles.

[Psychic Powers]{.underline}

The star-mask hosts have psychic powers granted to them by their
symbiotic masks. Such hosts usually have some outward sign of their
powers---swollen skulls or throbbing veins.

[Choose one or more of the following:]{.underline}

**C: Dysthymic ray +5 + level vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---10 psychic
damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 30 damage)

*Natural 18+:* The target is confused (save ends) and any confusion
effect from the ray on a previous target ends.

*Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.

*Group mind:* Provided there is a star-mask brain around (it doesn't
have to be in the fight, just in the general vicinity), the host gains a
+4 bonus to MD and knows everything that the star-mask brain knows (and
vise-versa). If there isn't a star-mask brain in the area, the host only
gains a +1 bonus to MD.

*Healed by the hive mind:* Once per battle as a standard action, the
host heals 25% of its maximum hit points, as does one of its nearby
allies.

*Hive mind puppet:* When an enemy drops to 0 hp or below, it must roll a
save. If it fails, it's "turned" to the star-masks' side. A turned
creature recovers during its next turn with temporary hp equal to its
normal maximum hit points, but it's now an ally of the star-masks (hard
save ends, 16+). Once that creature saves and breaks free, it must roll
a normal save. If it fails, it loses the temporary hit points.

**R: Psychic chains +5 + level vs. MD**---5 ongoing psychic damage
(champion: 10 ongoing damage, epic: 20 ongoing damage)

*Aftereffect:* When the target saves against the ongoing damage, if the
save was a natural odd roll, the target becomes confused until it hits
an ally with an attack.

*Limited use:* 1/battle.

*Psychic illusion:* The host looks normal. It requires a DC 30 skill
check to notice things like tentacles or bulging muscles on it. If a
creature's MD is 17 or less, it won't even notice the mask itself.

*Telekinetic flight:* The host can fly. When an enemy misses the host
with an attack and rolls a natural 1--5, it pops free from that enemy.

**C: Woe betide you +5 + level vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---10 psychic
damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 35 damage), and the target can't heal
using a recovery (save ends)

*Limited use:* 1/battle.

[Physical Enhancements]{.underline}

The star-mask host has been physically enhanced by the star-mask.
Hunched and twisted forms or skin split open over bulging red muscles
are common side effects. The greater the physical enhancements the more
brutish and less intelligent the host becomes (and the easier for the
star-mask to influence).

[Choose one or more of the following:]{.underline}

*Amazing endurance:* The host gains +2 AC and +1 PD, or double that
bonus while it is defending a star-mask brain.

*Leap:* Once per battle when the escalation die is even, the host can
pop free from all enemies and leap somewhere nearby or far away as a
move action. If the host engages an enemy with this movement and
attacks, it gains a +1 bonus to that attack.

*Trampling charge:* As a standard action, the host moves through an
enemy's space without taking an opportunity attack and finishes its move
out of engagement, making the following attack against that enemy.

**Trample +5 + level vs. AC**---10 damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 40
damage)

*Natural even miss:* Half damage.

*Natural even hit:* The target pops free from the host and is hurled far
away from the host.

[Tentacles]{.underline}

The star-mask grips to its host with tentacles, but this star-mask has
gone further than that.

[Choose one or more of the following:]{.underline}

*Barbed tentacles:* Enemies that pop free of the host or move away from
it without first disengaging take 10 damage.

*Climbing tentacles:* The host can climb up walls and across ceilings as
easily as it moves on the ground.

*Grasping tentacles:* Enemies engaged with the host must roll twice for
disengage checks and take the lowest result.

*Tentacles everywhere:* If the star-mask host is intercepted, it can
make a *probing tentacles* attack as a free action.

**C: Probing tentacles +5 + level vs. PD (an enemy intercepting
it)**---The enemy becomes stuck and takes 5 ongoing poison damage (save
ends both) (champion: 10 ongoing damage; epic: 20 ongoing damage)

*Target dies while still stuck:* If a creature dies while stuck in the
tentacles, the host lays 1d4 star-mask eggs in it, which hatch into
scuttling star-masks after 1d3 -- 1 rounds (0 rounds mean the eggs hatch
almost instantly).

**R: Whipping tentacles +5 + level vs. AC**---10 damage (champion: 20
damage; epic: 35 damage)

*Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.

### Sunder Wraith

#### Sunder Wraith

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Normal   | Initiative: +16                                  | * | 22 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A | 18 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | **Shivering blade +13 vs. PD**---25 negative     | * | 20 |
| Blocker  | energy damage, or 50 negative energy damage if   | * |    |
|          | the target has been hit by at least one          |   | 1  |
| Undead   | *sundering* attack earlier in the battle         | * | 26 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Miss:* Negative energy damage equal to the      | P |    |
|          | natural attack roll.                             | D |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | **C: Sundering +13 vs. PD (one nearby            | * |    |
|          | enemy)**---30 negative energy damage, and        |   |    |
|          | teleport the sunder wraith into engagement with  | * |    |
|          | the target                                       | * |    |
|          |                                                  | M |    |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Teleport the sunder wraith  | D |    |
|          | somewhere nearby the target, but not engaged     | * |    |
|          | with an enemy.                                   | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Flight:* Sunder wraiths fly like the world is   | * |    |
|          | defined however they want it to be defined.      | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+* | P |    |
|          | to all damage (yes, even holy damage) except     | * |    |
|          | force damage, which damages it normally.         | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | A sunder wraith can move through solid objects,  |   |    |
|          | but it can't end its movement inside them.       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Destroyer:* Twice per battle when the sunder    |   |    |
|          | wraith moves through a solid object like a wall, |   |    |
|          | throne, door, or chest, the object must roll a   |   |    |
|          | normal save. If the save fails, the object is    |   |    |
|          | broken. Strongly magical objects get bonuses on  |   |    |
|          | the save, but err on the side of uh-oh.          |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

#### Great Sunder Wraith

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Normal   | Initiative: +19                                  | * | 25 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 11th   | **Shivering blade +16 vs. PD**---50 negative     | A | 21 |
| level    | energy damage, or 100 negative energy damage if  | C |    |
|          | the target has been hit by at least one          | * | 23 |
| Blocker  | *sundering* attack earlier in the battle         | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   | 2  |
| Undead   | *Miss:* Negative energy damage equal to the      | * | 52 |
|          | natural attack roll.                             | * |    |
|          |                                                  | P |    |
|          | **C: Sundering +16 vs. PD (one nearby            | D |    |
|          | enemy)**---60 negative energy damage, and        | * |    |
|          | teleport the sunder wraith into engagement with  | * |    |
|          | the target                                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Natural even miss:* Teleport the sunder wraith  | * |    |
|          | somewhere nearby the target, but not engaged     | M |    |
|          | with an enemy.                                   | D |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Flight:* Sunder wraiths fly like the world is   | * |    |
|          | defined however they want it to be defined.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
|          | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+* | * |    |
|          | to all damage (yes, even holy damage, and for    | H |    |
|          | that matter, this creature has outgrown          | P |    |
|          | vulnerability to holy damage) except force       | * |    |
|          | damage, which damages it normally.               | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | A great sunder wraith can move through solid     |   |    |
|          | objects, but it can't end its movement inside    |   |    |
|          | them.                                            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Destroyer:* Three times per battle when the     |   |    |
|          | sunder wraith moves through a solid object like  |   |    |
|          | a wall, throne, door, or chest, the object must  |   |    |
|          | roll a hard save. If the save fails, the object  |   |    |
|          | is broken. Strongly magical objects get bonuses  |   |    |
|          | on the save, but err on the side of uh-oh.       |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### Taranar

[Special Abilities for All Taranar]{.underline}

*All-rock (resist weapons and negative energy 16+):* All taranar are
resistant to physical damage as a result of their stony nature. If an
assailant fails to make a natural roll of 16+ when using a weapon
against a taranar, the attacker deals only half damage. The resistance
also applies to negative energy damage, which tends to fizzle
ineffectively against the ancient stones.

*Lightning-flare:* As a last ditch defense, when a taranar is reduced to
between 1 and 10 hp, it can discharge its remaining stored energy as a
counterattack (no attack roll required) against the character who
delivered the telling blow, dealing 1d6 lightning damage per level of
the taranar. The taranar immediately returns to its immobile rock form
and cannot take any further role in the battle. It will then remain
torpid unless destroyed or the cycle turns full circle and the
conditions for it to wake are met again (providing they can be). Such
severely damaged creatures reawaken as broken taranar, regardless of
what they were before.

*Thick-skinned:* Being made of stone has its benefits. The taranar are
immune to almost all effects---they cannot be dazed, weakened, confused,
or made vulnerable to anything beyond those energies they are already
vulnerable to (fire and cold; see below). Taranar are also immune to
ongoing damage.

[Cracking Up]{.underline}

Taranar are big and tough. But even big, tough creatures have a weakness
(or, at least, you really have to hope they do if you don't want to get
squashed). For the stone people, their two main fears are fire and ice.
This may stem from their clashes with their ancient foes the frost and
fire giants, or it may be due to the actions of those who, over the
centuries, have used heat and cold to smash their bodies into manageable
fragments.

As a result, the taranar are vulnerable to fire and cold energy, both of
which play havoc with their physiology---so much so that a hit from a
fire attack followed immediately (either in the current or subsequent
round) by a hit from a cold attack will cause double cold damage,
irrespective of whether a critical (normally 18+) has been rolled. If a
critical is rolled, triple the damage inflicted.

[Iconic Powers]{.underline}

Centuries of existence as free-standing monoliths have exposed the
taranar to many of the world's most powerful magical traditions. There's
something about a circle or avenue of standing stones that inspires
druids, cultists, chaos magicians, and wizards to get a ritual going.

Part of the taranar's remarkable success at hiding through the ages
comes from the fact that they don't wake up just because someone is
using their stone as an altar for a goblin sacrifice or a ritual of
rebirth. But sleeping through centuries of ritual magic doesn't mean
that the taranar have been unaffected by the experience. It's possible
that a taranar could have acquired lingering magical abilities.

You can use the following special abilities in at least five ways:

1: As a consequence of a story connection between a taranar and its
location in the world, obviously exposed for a long period of time to
magicians associated with an icon.

2: As a reaction to a PC's use of an icon advantage, particularly as a
possible complication of an icon advantage used when the taranar are in
play or in the story.

3: To cast the taranar as heroes or villains relative to the player
characters' intentions.

4: As lower impact nastier specials in battles that seem overly easy on
the PCs.

5: In combination with each other, since it's entirely possible that the
magic of more than one icon has shaped a stone!

**Magic Icon (The Flying Stones):** In sympathy with the magic that
keeps the Magic Icon city aloft, a taranar influenced by the Magic
Icon's magic can fly until the end of a battle after it has either
scored or suffered a critical hit. The flight isn't quick or agile. More
like empowered levitation, about what you'd expect from an airborne
monolith.

**Demonic Icon (The Stones are Red):** Roll a random demon ability. The
taranar will use that ability once this battle, and once only.

**Graceful Icon (Repose):** Roll a normal save when dropped to 0 hit
points. If the save succeeds, the taranar only drops to 1 hit point and
teleports somewhere far away to sleep for a while. And then it wakes up.
And remembers everything...

**Nature Icon (The Call):** The first time the escalation die reaches
5+, another taranar surfaces in the battle, called up from hidden
slumber.

**Undead Icon (Simple Fear):** The taranar has the *fear* ability,
affecting creatures at or beneath the fear threshold for its level
indicated on the DIY monster tables.

**Brute Icon (Savagery):** −2 to all defenses. +2 to all attacks.

**Draconic Icon (Fight the Claw):** Taranar are usually enemies of the
dragons. Exposure to their magic has taught the taranar to use the
escalation die whenever it is odd.

#### Conglomerate

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +2                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: cold, fire                         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Pebble dash +7 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---3 damage  | * | 6 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   | 1 |
| Elemental |                                                   | * | 2 |
|           | *Rock pile:* Once per battle the conglomerate can | * |   |
|           | launch itself at a nearby enemy as a hail of      | P | 8 |
|           | rubble.                                           | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Throwing stones +6 vs. PD (one nearby        | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---7 damage and the conglomerate          |   |   |
|           | teleports to become adjacent to the target.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Coryphée

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | Vulnerability: cold, fire                         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Sparking clogs +7 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---10     | * | 8 |
| Blocker   | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 5 lightning  | * | 3 |
|           | damage from the electrical discharge caused by    | * |   |
|           | the impact of crystal-laced stone feet on their   | P | 6 |
|           | person.                                           | D | 6 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Stoneshoe shuffle +8 vs. PD (1d4 nearby      | * |   |
|           | enemies)**---18 damage                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural roll over target's Dexterity:* The       | * |   |
|           | target is hampered as the localized earth tremors | M |   |
|           | generated by the dancing stones causes them to    | D |   |
|           | struggle to maintain their balance (save ends).   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* The coryphée can use this ability  |   |   |
|           | only when the escalation die is even.             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Broken Taranar

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: cold, fire                         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Boulder blow +9 vs. AC**---21 damage            | * | 8 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 7 damage.                                 |   | 1 |
| Elemental |                                                   | * | 4 |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *Rolling stone:* Once per round, if the broken    | D | 6 |
|           | taranar misses its target with a natural even     | * |   |
|           | roll, it can immediately pop free, move to engage | * |   |
|           | a nearby enemy it was not engaged with, and       |   |   |
|           | attack. If it misses that enemy, it cannot        | * |   |
|           | attempt another attack until its next turn.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Hunter

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: cold, fire                         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Fists of stone +9 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---14     | * | 9 |
| Spoiler   | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Elemental | *Natural even hit:* The target takes 7 lightning  | * | 4 |
|           | damage from the electrical energy released on     | * |   |
|           | impact by the taranar's integral crystals.        | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 8 |
|           | **R: Lightning strike +8 vs. PD (one nearby or    | * |   |
|           | faraway enemy)**---21 lightning damage            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The taranar smashes its fists      | * |   |
|           | together to generate a fearsome bolt of lightning | * |   |
|           | that also dazes the target (save ends).           | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Miss:* The target is dazed until the end of      | * |   |
|           | their next turn.                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shard burst:* When reduced to 0 hp the taranar   | H |   |
|           | hunter explodes in a shower of rock splinters,    | P |   |
|           | causing 10 damage to anyone it is engaged with    | * |   |
|           | and 1d3 other nearby enemies.                     | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Bugler

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +6                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 5th    | Vulnerability: cold, fire                        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Rock smash +8 vs. AC**---18 damage             | * | 6 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes 9 lightning  |   | 1 |
| E        | damage released by the taranar's all-pervading   | * | 9 |
| lemental | crystalline components on contact.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **R: Call to the storm +9 vs. PD (1d6 nearby     | D | 0 |
|          | enemies)**---30 thunder damage, and the target   | * | 4 |
|          | is weakened until the end of their next turn     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, when the escalation die | * |   |
|          | is 3+.                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **R: Song of summoned stones +11 vs. PD (one     | D |   |
|          | nearby enemy)**---27 damage                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The summoned stones          |   |   |
|          | attacking the target fall from above, dazing     | * |   |
|          | them (save ends).                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The summoned stones attacking | P |   |
|          | the target roll into them, hampering them (save  | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 18+:* Once per battle, the taranar      |   |   |
|          | bugler can cause the stones it summons to        |   |   |
|          | coalesce into animated conglomerates, whose      |   |   |
|          | number is determined by the escalation die +1.   |   |   |
|          | The conglomerates take their turns immediately   |   |   |
|          | after the bugler when they first appear and each |   |   |
|          | round thereafter.                                |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 9 damage.                                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Avalanche

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | Vulnerability: cold, fire                        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Crashing & smashing +12 vs. AC (1d4            | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | attacks)**---25 damage                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural odd hit or miss:* The taranar avalanche | * | 8 |
| lemental | deals damage to itself equal to 1d6 per point on | * |   |
|          | the escalation die; damage is not reduced by the | P | 2 |
|          | *all-rock* ability.                              | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *No lightning flare ability.* Taranar avalanches | * |   |
|          | are too far gone.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Great Stone

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +13                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: cold, fire                        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Stones' might +13 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---50    | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| E        | *Both attacks hit the same target:* The taranar  | * | 0 |
| lemental | smashes the target into the ground, the target   | * |   |
|          | is either stuck, hard save ends (if the ground   | P | 4 |
|          | was soft), or takes 20 damage (if the ground was | D | 0 |
|          | hard).                                           | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss with both attacks:* The taranar ends up    |   |   |
|          | just pounding the ground, and can make a         | * |   |
|          | follow-up *seism* attack as a quick action.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | **C: Seism +13 vs. PD (the four closest nearby   | D |   |
|          | or faraway enemies)**---40 damage                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Throw enemy:* The taranar great stone can use   | * |   |
|          | an enemy as a missile weapon, making the         | H |   |
|          | following attack.                                | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Heave +13 vs. AC**---60 damage, and the target | * |   |
|          | is thrown away from the taranar, and the taranar |   |   |
|          | makes a thrown adventurer attack to see if the   |   |   |
|          | character just tossed through the air hits       |   |   |
|          | anybody                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 30 damage, and the adventurer avoids     |   |   |
|          | being thrown.                                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Thrown adventurer +13 vs. AC (1d4 enemies in a |   |   |
|          | group)**---30 damage, and the thrown adventurer  |   |   |
|          | slams into the targets                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Blade breaker:* Once per battle when a melee    |   |   |
|          | weapon attack hits the taranar and is not a      |   |   |
|          | crit, the attack does half damage and the weapon |   |   |
|          | breaks. Wielders of magical weapons have a       |   |   |
|          | choice between dealing no damage but their       |   |   |
|          | weapon staying intact, or dealing normal damage  |   |   |
|          | but their weapon shatters and deals 2d10 force   |   |   |
|          | damage to both them and the taranar.             |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Taranar Warrior

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +4                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | Vulnerability: cold, fire                        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Fists of stone +12 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---30   | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| E        | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target takes 10  | * | 7 |
| lemental | lightning damage from the electrical energy      | * |   |
|          | released on impact by the taranar's integral     | P | 1 |
|          | crystals.                                        | D | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | **R: Lightning strike +8 vs. PD (one nearby or   | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---44 lightning damage           |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The taranar smashes its fists     | * |   |
|          | together to generate a fearsome bolt of          | M |   |
|          | lightning that also weakens the target until the | D |   |
|          | end of their next turn.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* The target is dazed until the end of     |   |   |
|          | their next turn.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Tarrasque

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
| Huge     | Initiative: +20                                  | * | 31 |
|          |                                                  | * |    |
| 15th   | [Creature of Legend]{.underline}                 | A | 29 |
| level    |                                                  | C |    |
|          | The tarrasque can make one close attack and one  | * | 25 |
| Wrecker  | melee attack each round as a standard action.    | * |    |
|          | Note that flying is usually no defense against   |   | 21 |
| Beast    | the tarrasque, which is huge and powerful enough | * | 30 |
|          | to pluck or whack enemies out of the sky with    | * |    |
|          | surprising leaps.                                | P |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | **All-enveloping toothy maw +19 vs. AC**---155   | * |    |
|          | damage                                           | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The tarrasque grabs the      | * |    |
|          | target. It will swallow a grabbed enemy in 1d3   | * |    |
|          | rounds (see *swallow whole*).                    | M |    |
|          |                                                  | D |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The tarrasque swallows the target | * |    |
|          | immediately (see *swallow whole*).               | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Immense spike, horn, or tusk +18 vs.           | * |    |
|          | AC**---155 damage                                | * |    |
|          |                                                  | H |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 9d6 extra damage | P |    |
|          | and pops free from the tarrasque as it's hurled  | * |    |
|          | faraway.                                         | * |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Earth-shaking, taloned claw +20 vs. AC      |   |    |
|          | (each nearby enemy in a group)**---155 damage    |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is stunned (save       |   |    |
|          | ends).                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* The target is dazed (save ends).         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **C: Cataclysmic tail slam +18 vs. PD (each      |   |    |
|          | nearby enemy in a group)**---170 damage          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target is vulnerable (save    |   |    |
|          | ends).                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* The target is dazed until the end of its |   |    |
|          | next turn.                                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Amphibious:* The tarrasque can swim and breathe |   |    |
|          | underwater (or it holds so much air in its vast  |   |    |
|          | lungs that it makes no difference).              |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Enormously bulky:* The tarrasque is so huge     |   |    |
|          | that it ignores opportunity attacks. In          |   |    |
|          | addition, normal-sized enemies are like fleas to |   |    |
|          | it, and disengaging from the tarrasque requires  |   |    |
|          | only an easy save (6+), unless the target is     |   |    |
|          | grabbed.                                         |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Immortal:* The tarrasque can't be killed, save  |   |    |
|          | by the explicit will of a god (and not some      |   |    |
|          | jumped-up local god, either) or, perhaps, the    |   |    |
|          | sacrifice of a great icon. The tarrasque's HP    |   |    |
|          | total indicates the amount of damage required to |   |    |
|          | make it disgorge swallowed enemies and flee to   |   |    |
|          | go hibernate while it regenerates the damage it  |   |    |
|          | suffered and decide if it wants to rampage       |   |    |
|          | again.                                           |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Inflexible:* The tarrasque can't easily fight   |   |    |
|          | foes that get onto its back, and may not even    |   |    |
|          | notice them if they aren't attacking it. When it |   |    |
|          | does tire of a passenger, it can either use its  |   |    |
|          | *tail slam* attack (--2 attack penalty: on a     |   |    |
|          | hit, the target only takes half damage and is    |   |    |
|          | knocked off the tarrasque \[possibly falling     |   |    |
|          | damage\]; on a miss, the target takes no damage) |   |    |
|          | or a *drag* attack as a standard action,         |   |    |
|          | crushing the rider between its shell and a       |   |    |
|          | mountainside or other high, hard obstacle.       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Drag +21 vs. PD (each creature on its          |   |    |
|          | back)**---130 damage, the target pops free of    |   |    |
|          | the tarrasque, and the target is hampered (save  |   |    |
|          | ends)                                            |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Legendary resistance:* The tarrasque is immune  |   |    |
|          | to normal conditions and effects (stunned,       |   |    |
|          | weakened, etc.), but it isn't completely         |   |    |
|          | impervious. Bypassing its resistances requires   |   |    |
|          | icon-supported effort. A PC can use one 5 or 6   |   |    |
|          | they acquired from icon relationship dice rolls  |   |    |
|          | to overcome the resistance each time they use an |   |    |
|          | attack or power that would apply a condition or  |   |    |
|          | effect upon the tarrasque. Of course, they must  |   |    |
|          | also provide a story to go along with the reason |   |    |
|          | the tarrasque is affected.                       |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Leveler:* When the escalation die is even, as a |   |    |
|          | move action the tarrasque can demolish any       |   |    |
|          | ordinary structure it can reach, such as a       |   |    |
|          | house, castle wall, temple, or ship. The beast   |   |    |
|          | automatically reduces the structure to rubble,   |   |    |
|          | rendering it useless. Each creature on top of or |   |    |
|          | within the structure is subject to a *collapse*  |   |    |
|          | attack.                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Collapse +18 vs. PD (each creature in/on the   |   |    |
|          | structure)**---90 damage, and the target is      |   |    |
|          | stuck and takes 20 ongoing damage (hard save     |   |    |
|          | ends both, 16+)                                  |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Swallow whole:* Once a creature is swallowed,   |   |    |
|          | it goes inside one of the tarrasque's gigantic   |   |    |
|          | stomachs. It can still act while inside the      |   |    |
|          | tarrasque, but it will have to deal with the     |   |    |
|          | beast's stomach acid that is splashing around. A |   |    |
|          | swallowed creature must deal 400 damage to the   |   |    |
|          | tarrasque to force it to disgorge the contents   |   |    |
|          | of its gullet, freeing the creature. During the  |   |    |
|          | tarrasque's turn, it can make a *gullet          |   |    |
|          | digestion* attack against the target as a free   |   |    |
|          | action.                                          |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | **Gullet digestion +19 vs. PD**---80 acid        |   |    |
|          | damage, and 20 ongoing acid damage               |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Miss:* 5d12 acid damage.                        |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Soft-ish innerbelly:* The tarrasque doesn't     |   |    |
|          | have scales on the inside. It takes a --5        |   |    |
|          | penalty to all defenses against attacks from     |   |    |
|          | inside its gullet, though only melee and close   |   |    |
|          | attacks can be made in there. The tarrasque's    |   |    |
|          | insides are immune to acid damage, however.      |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Fear:* While engaged with the tarrasque,        |   |    |
|          | enemies that have 216 hp or fewer are dazed (--4 |   |    |
|          | attack) and do not add the escalation die to     |   |    |
|          | their attacks.                                   |   |    |
|          |                                                  |   |    |
|          | *Regeneration 230:* While a tarrasque is         |   |    |
|          | damaged, its malign magical flesh heals 230 hit  |   |    |
|          | points at the start of the tarrasque's turn. It  |   |    |
|          | can regenerate five times per battle. If it      |   |    |
|          | heals up to its maximum hit points, then that    |   |    |
|          | use of *regeneration* doesn't count against the  |   |    |
|          | five-use limit. With this power, the monstrosity |   |    |
|          | is likely unstoppable without a powerful magical |   |    |
|          | artifact designed specifically to bind, wound,   |   |    |
|          | or otherwise hamper the tarrasque.               |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+
|          |                                                  |   |    |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+----+

### The Saved

#### Avenging Orb

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Gauntlet slap +5 vs. AC**---3 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* The target also takes 3  | * | 3 |
| Caster    | ongoing psychic damage.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Orb of pain +7 vs. MD (one or more nearby or | * | 3 |
|           | faraway enemies; see *history of abuse*)**---5    | * |   |
|           | psychic damage                                    | P | 4 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *Natural 5, 10, 15, 20:* The target also takes 3  | * |   |
|           | ongoing psychic damage.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Beyond saving:* The avenging orb takes a --5     | * |   |
|           | penalty to saving throws.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *History of abuse:* Keep track of the number of   | D |   |
|           | enemy attacks that hit the avenging orb during    | * |   |
|           | the battle. Until the end of the battle, the      | * |   |
|           | avenging orb can target an additional enemy       |   |   |
|           | beyond the first with its *orb of pain* attack    | * |   |
|           | for each of those hits. (Note that avenging orbs  | * |   |
|           | engaged in melee usually choose to use *orb of    | H |   |
|           | pain* and suffer any resulting opportunity        | P |   |
|           | attacks; if they're lucky they'll survive the     | * |   |
|           | attack and be able to choose more targets for the | * |   |
|           | *orb of pain*.)                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Destroying Sword

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 2nd     | **Cheap greatsword +8 vs. AC**---3 damage         | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target takes extra damage  | * | 4 |
| Wrecker   | equal to half the amount the destroying sword     | * |   |
|           | took from the last attack that hit it this        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | battle.                                           | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Shortbow +6 vs. AC (one nearby or faraway    | P | 3 |
|           | enemy)**---6 damage                               | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Beyond saving:* The destroying sword takes a --5 | * |   |
|           | penalty to saving throws.                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Enduring Shield

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Steel hammer +7 vs. AC**---6 damage             | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 1d4 damage.                               | * | 5 |
| Blocker   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Anguished interceptor:* When an enduring shield  |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | is engaged and an enemy attempts to move past it, | * | 3 |
|           | the enduring shield can roll a disengage check to | * |   |
|           | intercept it as an interrupt action (once per     | P | 4 |
|           | round). If the attempt fails, the enduring shield | D | 0 |
|           | takes 1d6 psychic damage.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Beyond saving:* The enduring shield takes a --5  |   |   |
|           | penalty to saving throws.                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Supernatural endurance:* When an attack hits the | M |   |
|           | enduring shield, it gains a +5 bonus to the       | D |   |
|           | defense that the attack targeted until the end of | * |   |
|           | the battle or until another attack hits it, in    | * |   |
|           | which case the bonus switches to the defense most |   |   |
|           | recently hit.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Thunder Lizard

#### Dainty Lizard

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| 1st     | **Nasty nip +6 vs. AC**---4 damage from rows of   | A |   |
| level     | small, very sharp teeth                           | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| Mook      | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Sweet dreams:* Some dainty lizards have a        | * | 2 |
|           | soporific bite that allows them to inject a       | * |   |
|           | powerful anesthetic into the wound from a gland   | P | 9 |
|           | located in the roof of its mouth. Make this       | D |   |
|           | triggered attack as a follow-up when the *nasty   | * |   |
|           | nip* attack hits with a natural even roll.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **Soporific bite +6 vs. PD**---The target rolls a | * |   |
|           | save. If it fails, the target is helpless (--4 to | * |   |
|           | all defenses) as it falls unconscious (save ends, | M |   |
|           | or taking 10 damage ends). When a creature falls  | D |   |
|           | unconscious this way, each other nearby dainty    | * |   |
|           | lizard that is not already engaged will move and  | * |   |
|           | attack the target during its next turn.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Clubtail

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 3rd     | **Headbutt +6 vs. AC**---16 damage                | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **C: Tail swipe +8 vs. AC (one nearby             | * | 8 |
| Troop     | enemy)**---20 damage                              | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural 20:* The clubtail can make a second      | * | 1 |
|           | attack.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Spiketail

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 4th    | **Thagomizer +10 vs. AC**---24 damage            | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Hit and natural attack roll exceeds target's    | * | 7 |
| Wrecker  | Dexterity:* Target is flung 1d6 × 10 feet in a   | * |   |
|          | random direction. (If that's going to put it     |   | 1 |
| Beast    | into a very dangerous place or over a cliff or   | * | 4 |
|          | similar bad spot, it can roll a normal save to   | * |   |
|          | catch itself before being thrown and take        | P | 1 |
|          | another 2d6 damage.                              | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | **R: Rear and stomp! +9 vs. PD (1d3 nearby       | * |   |
|          | enemies)**---22 damage and the target is         |   |   |
|          | hampered (save ends)                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* 1/battle, but not while           | M |   |
|          | staggered.                                       | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Whoooosh:* When the escalation die is even, the | * |   |
|          | spiketail can target a nearby enemy with its     |   |   |
|          | *thagomizer* attack instead of needing to be     | * |   |
|          | engaged.                                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trihorn

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| 4th    | **Three-pronged attack +9 vs. AC**---20 damage,  | A |   |
| level    | or 30 damage if the target is large or bigger    | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| Troop    | *Furious charge:* The *three-pronged attack*     | * |   |
|          | instead deals +10 damage on a hit if the trihorn |   | 1 |
| Beast    | first moves before attacking an enemy it was not | * | 3 |
|          | engaged with at the start of its turn.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *Knocked flying:* Not only does the *furious     | * |   |
|          | charge* cause damage, but on a *natural even     |   |   |
|          | hit*, the target is knocked to one side and      | * |   |
|          | dazed until the end of its next turn. On a       | * |   |
|          | *natural odd hit*, the target is thrown backward | M |   |
|          | and dazed (save ends). The trihorn ends the      | D |   |
|          | round unengaged and ready to make a new *furious | * |   |
|          | charge* attack.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Earthshaker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Squish +10 vs. AC**---50 damage                | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **C: Whipcrack of a tail +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler  | enemies)**---20 thunder damage, and the target   | * |   |
|          | is stunned (save ends) by the pealing boom       |   | 1 |
| Beast    | created                                          | * | 3 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The earthshaker can use           | P | 2 |
|          | *whipcrack* only when the escalation die is      | D | 3 |
|          | even. With such a long tail, it takes the        | * | 5 |
|          | earthshaker a little time to ready its inbuilt   | * |   |
|          | whip.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Stalker

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Slashing teeth +9 vs. AC**---30 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The stalker locks onto its   | * | 0 |
| Troop    | victim with its powerful jaws. If it's still     | * |   |
|          | engaged with the target at the start of its next |   | 1 |
| Beast    | turn, it can make a *tearing claws* attack.      | * | 6 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 15 damage.                               | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 6 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Tearing claws +10 vs. AC | * | 0 |
|          | (2 attacks)**---18 damage as the stalker rakes   | * |   |
|          | its victim with its clawed feet                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Surprise!:* Despite its size, as an ambush      | * |   |
|          | hunter, the stalker is very good at shadowing    |   |   |
|          | its prey. Checks to notice it and avoid surprise | * |   |
|          | are ridiculously hard.                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Tyrant Lizard

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 7th    | **Rending jaws +12 vs. AC**---60 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural roll above target's Constitution:* 15   | * | 1 |
| Wrecker  | ongoing damage.                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Beast    | **C: Earsplitting roar +12 vs. MD (1d6 nearby    | * | 6 |
|          | enemies)**---40 thunder damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *Natural 14+:* The target can't use the          | D | 4 |
|          | escalation die until the end of its next turn.   | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The tyrant lizard can use         |   |   |
|          | *earsplitting roar* during its first turn of a   | * |   |
|          | battle and when the escalation die is odd.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Terrifying bellow:* The tyrant lizard's         | * |   |
|          | *earsplitting roar* attack instead weakens the   |   |   |
|          | target until the end of its next turn.           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Treant

All treants except awakened tress have the *demolish* ability.

*Free-form ability---Demolish:* Given time, treants are capable of
pulling apart just about anything that's been put together. Their roots
squeeze into spaces between paving stones, slowly pulling them up and
out of place. Their branches can likewise worm their way into spaces in
walls, doors, and gates, and with steady pressure they can pull down
most human-made structures. This slow-motion destruction takes minutes
for the simplest efforts and hours for major demolition.

#### Awakened Trees

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Lashing branches +9 vs. AC**---7 damage         | * | 0 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Hardwood resistance:* This creature has *resist  |   | 1 |
| Plant     | damage 12+* to all damage except fire damage and  | * | 4 |
|           | melee weapon damage, which damages it normally.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 1 |
|           |                                                   | D | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Common Treant

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 5th     | Vulnerability: fire                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Grasping branches +10 vs. AC**---9 damage, and  | * | 1 |
| Spoiler   | the treant grabs the target. When the treant      | * |   |
|           | starts its turn grabbing an enemy, it can make a  |   | 1 |
| Plant     | *twist and snap* attack against that target as a  | * | 5 |
|           | standard action that turn.                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Twist and snap +14        | D | 5 |
|           | (includes +4 grab bonus) vs. PD**---27 damage     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fire fire fire!:* When the treant takes 15 or    |   |   |
|           | more fire damage from a single attack, it         | * |   |
|           | releases all grabbed creatures.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Hardwood resistance:* This creature has *resist  | D |   |
|           | damage 12+* to all damage except fire damage and  | * |   |
|           | melee weapon damage, which damages it normally.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Toxic haze:* The treant exudes a toxic cloud of  | H |   |
|           | pollen. When an enemy engages the treant or       | P |   |
|           | starts its turn engaged with the treant, it takes | * |   |
|           | 4 poison damage.                                  | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Treant Titan

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: fire                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Grasping branches +15 vs. AC (2                | * | 6 |
| Spoiler  | attacks)**---30 damage, and the treant grabs the | * |   |
|          | target. When the treant starts its turn grabbing |   | 2 |
| Plant    | an enemy, it can make a *twist and snap* attack  | * | 0 |
|          | against that target as a standard action that    | * |   |
|          | turn.                                            | P | 3 |
|          |                                                  | D | 9 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Twist and snap +19       | * | 0 |
|          | (includes +4 grab bonus) vs. PD**---80 damage,   | * |   |
|          | and the target is dazed (save ends). If the      |   |   |
|          | treant starts its turn grabbing a dazed enemy,   | * |   |
|          | it can make a *titanic rend* attack against that | * |   |
|          | target as a standard action that turn.           | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Miss:* 40 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Titanic rend +19         |   |   |
|          | (includes +4 grab bonus) vs. PD**---160 damage,  | * |   |
|          | and the treant titan can continue making         | * |   |
|          | *titanic rend* attacks against the target until  | H |   |
|          | it escapes the grab, at which point the treant   | P |   |
|          | will have to use a *grasping branches* attack    | * |   |
|          | against it again.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 60 damage.                               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Fire fire fire!:* When the treant takes 35 or   |   |   |
|          | more fire damage from a single attack, it        |   |   |
|          | releases all grabbed creatures.                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Hardwood resistance:* This creature has *resist |   |   |
|          | damage 18+* to all damage except fire damage and |   |   |
|          | melee weapon damage, which damages it normally.  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Coffin of living wood:* When the treant titan   |   |   |
|          | hits with a *titanic rend* attack, the target is |   |   |
|          | pulled into a hollow chamber within the treant.  |   |   |
|          | While grabbed by the treant this way, the target |   |   |
|          | can't be the target of its allies' powers or     |   |   |
|          | spells.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Gauntlet of branches:* Countless smaller        |   |   |
|          | branches whip through the air around the treant  |   |   |
|          | titan. When a creature engaged with the treant   |   |   |
|          | misses it with an attack, that creature takes 12 |   |   |
|          | damage from the whipping branches.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Troglodyte

[For all troglodytes]{.underline}

*Trog stench:* Trogs spray scents that stink so badly that other
humanoids take penalties to all attacks, defenses, and saves when
engaged with a troglodyte or when nearby three or more troglodytes.
Non-humanoids aren't affected.

Humanoids affected by *trog stench* can make a normal save (with a
penalty) at the end of each of their turns. If the save succeeds, the
humanoid can ignore all *trog stench* for the rest of the battle.

*Trog stench* penalties vary for different humanoid races:

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------
  Race                                                    Save Penalty
  ------------------------------------------------------- ---------------
  Elves, gnolls, gnomes                                   -4

  Humans, halflings, half-elves, holy ones, tieflings,    -3
  etc.                                                    

  Half-orcs, dragonics                                    -2

  Dwarves                                                 -1

  Forgeborn                                               0
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------

#### Trog

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +4                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Club +6 vs. AC**---8 damage                     | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* Damage equal to the penalty the trog's    | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   | stench currently imposes on the target.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Javelin +5 vs. AC**---6 damage               | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and        | P | 3 |
|           | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies    | D | 8 |
|           | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trog Chanter

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Spear +8 vs. AC**---12 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* Damage equal to the penalty the trog's    | * | 6 |
| Leader    | stench currently imposes on the target.           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | **R: Hissing curse +10 vs. MD (one nearby enemy,  | * | 8 |
|           | or a faraway enemy at --2 atk)**---10 damage, and | * |   |
|           | the target is again affected by *trog stench* if  | P | 4 |
|           | it had saved against the effect                   | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 20:* All nearby humanoids who saved      | * |   |
|           | against *trog stench* earlier in the battle are   |   |   |
|           | affected again by it.                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and        | M |   |
|           | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies    | D |   |
|           | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trog Fouler

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +4                                     | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 5th     | **Slimy backhand +9 vs. AC**---14 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 18+:* The target pops free from the trog | * | 9 |
| Spoiler   | fouler and loses its next move action.            | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | *Miss:* Ongoing damage equal to twice the penalty | * | 4 |
|           | the trog's stench currently imposes on the        | * |   |
|           | target. This damage continues until the target    | P | 8 |
|           | saves against the stench effect.                  | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and        | * |   |
|           | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies    |   |   |
|           | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Pungent pugilist:* Until the trog fouler drops   | M |   |
|           | to 0 hp, while a creature is nearby the fouler,   | D |   |
|           | it is subject to *trog stench* and doesn't roll   | * |   |
|           | saves against the stench at the end of its turn.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Dead stench:* Dropping the trog fouler to 0 hit  | H |   |
|           | points isn't enough. The PCs need to use a        | P |   |
|           | magical effect of some sort---or possibly an icon | * |   |
|           | relationship advantage---to end the stench after  | * |   |
|           | the fouler has fallen, or move the fight so that  |   |   |
|           | it's no longer nearby the fouler's corpse.        |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trog Shaman

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative +6                                     | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Grimy spear +11 vs. AC**---18 damage            | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is again affected   | * | 9 |
| Leader    | by *trog stench* if it had saved against the      | * |   |
|           | effect.                                           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | *Miss:* Damage equal to three times the penalty   | * |   |
|           | the trog's stench currently imposes on the        | P | 9 |
|           | target.                                           | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Special:* See *primeval grudge*.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Sibilant curse +11 vs. MD (one nearby        | * |   |
|           | enemy)**---17 psychic damage, and the target is   | * |   |
|           | vulnerable to all attacks by troglodytes          | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Primeval grudge:* Until the trog shaman drops to | * |   |
|           | 0 hp, the melee attacks of each trog nearby the   | * |   |
|           | shaman deals 6 extra damage to elves and dwarves, |   |   |
|           | and 3 extra damage to half-elves.                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and        | H |   |
|           | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies    | P |   |
|           | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Extra grime:* *Grimy spear* now re-applies *trog |   |   |
|           | stench* on any natural odd roll (other than a     |   |   |
|           | natural 1, of course)                             |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trog Chieftain

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative +8                                    | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Ancestral trident +12 vs. AC**---28 damage,    | A |   |
| level    | and the target takes a --5 penalty to disengage  | C | 2 |
|          | checks until the end of its next turn            | * | 0 |
| Leader   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* Damage equal to five times the penalty   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid | the trog's stench currently imposes on the       | * | 8 |
|          | target.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | **C: Bellow of dominance +11 vs. MD (one nearby  | D | 2 |
|          | enemy not effected by *trog stench*)**---25      | * | 5 |
|          | psychic damage, and the trog chieftain gains a   | * |   |
|          | *fear aura* against the target (save ends)       |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *War cackle:* When the chieftain drops an enemy  | * |   |
|          | to 0 hp or below, each nearby troglodyte can     | M |   |
|          | roll a saving throw against one effect on it. If | D |   |
|          | that enemy is a dwarf or elf, the save gains a   | * |   |
|          | +5 bonus.                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and       | * |   |
|          | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies   | * |   |
|          | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty. | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Scuzzy-toothed yawp:* While an enemy is         |   |   |
|          | affected by the *fear aura* of the trog          |   |   |
|          | chieftain's *bellow of dominance*, that enemy    |   |   |
|          | can't attack a troglodyte.                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Trog Underling

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 8th     | **Club +12 vs. AC**---22 damage                   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | *Miss:* Damage equal to three times the penalty   | * | 2 |
| Mook      | the trog's stench currently imposes on the        | * |   |
|           | target.                                           |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 7 |
|           | **R: Javelin +11 vs. AC**---16 damage             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 3 |
|           | *Chameleon:* Underground, or in swamps and        | D | 8 |
|           | rivers, attacks against troglodytes by enemies    | * |   |
|           | who aren't engaged with them take a --4 penalty.  | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Troll

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large     | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 4th     | **Greedy wicked claw +8 vs. AC (2 attacks)**---15 | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| Troop     | *Trollish regeneration 10:* While a troll is      | * |   |
|           | damaged, its rubbery flesh heals 10 hit points at |   | 1 |
| Giant     | the start of the troll's turn. It can regenerate  | * | 3 |
|           | five times per battle. If it heals to its maximum | * |   |
|           | hit points, then that use of *regeneration*       | P | 9 |
|           | doesn't count against the five-use limit.         | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | When the troll is hit by an attack that deals     | * |   |
|           | fire or acid damage, it loses one use of its      |   |   |
|           | *regeneration*, and it can't regenerate during    | * |   |
|           | its next turn.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | Dropping a troll to 0 hp doesn't kill it if it    | D |   |
|           | has any uses of *regeneration* left.              | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | Increased regeneration: Increase the troll's      | * |   |
|           | regeneration dice; the baseline amount a troll    | H |   |
|           | regenerates should run about 1/9 of its total hp, | P |   |
|           | but you can go higher to be nasty.                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | Mutant: Fire and acid don't hurt the troll's      |   |   |
|           | regeneration; lightning does instead.             |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | Rending: If both *claw* attacks hit the same      |   |   |
|           | target, the target also takes 10 ongoing damage.  |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Undead Icon Cult

#### Undead Icon Cultist

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Pitchforks and torches +7 vs. AC**---4 damage   | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Also deals 6 fire damage.     | * | 6 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Slingshot staff +6 vs. AC (1d3 nearby        |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | enemies in a group)**---5 damage                  | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Fanatical mob:* Each cultist counts as two       | P | 8 |
|           | monsters for the purpose of disengage checks      | D |   |
|           | (disengaging from one requires a disengage check  | * |   |
|           | of 12+, from two is 14+, three is 16+, etc.).     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials for Empowered                   | * |   |
|           | Cultists]{.underline}                             | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Undying breath:* This mook has twice as many hit | D |   |
|           | points as other mooks.                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Strength of the dead:* This mook has +1 to       |   |   |
|           | attack.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Death's promise:* When this mook dies, it rises  | H |   |
|           | immediately on full hit points but is now UNDEAD  | P |   |
|           | not HUMANOID.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Drudge Citizen

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +3                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 3rd     | **Clumsy scythe +8 vs. AC**---10 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 1-5:* Deal damage equal to the natural   | * | 8 |
| Troop     | d20 roll to both the target and the drudge        | * |   |
|           | citizen.                                          |   | 1 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Sudden intelligence:* Once per battle when the   | * |   |
|           | drudge moves it does not provoke opportunity      | P | 5 |
|           | attacks and if it makes a *clumsy scythe* attack  | D | 2 |
|           | immediately after it moves it gets a +2 bonus to  | * |   |
|           | its attack and deals half damage on a miss.       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Smarter than it looks:* Once per battle the      | M |   |
|           | drudge gets to reroll a missed *clumsy scythe*    | D |   |
|           | attack, and deals 5 damage if it still miss.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Phantomaton

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 4th     | **Hidden bone claws +9 vs. AC**---14 damage       | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural 19+ hit:* 6 ongoing negative energy      | * | 9 |
| Troop     | damage, and the target becomes vulnerable to all  | * |   |
|           | attacks by undead creatures until the end of the  |   | 1 |
| Undead    | battle.                                           | * | 3 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special (worker-type                     | P | 6 |
|           | phantomaton)]{.underline}                         | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Iron hoe:* The phantomaton is armed with a       | * |   |
|           | farming implement, and once per battle can make   |   |   |
|           | the following attack as a quick action:           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **Iron hoe +10 vs AC**---10 damage                | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Miss:* 4 damage to one other engaged enemy.      | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special (beast-type                      |   |   |
|           | phantomaton)]{.underline}                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Built to last:* This phantomaton has been built  | H |   |
|           | with sturdier materials than other phantomatons:  | P |   |
|           | it has +2 AC and 20 extra hp.                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Special (guard-type                      |   |   |
|           | phantomaton)]{.underline}                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Built-in spike-thrower:* The phantomaton has a   |   |   |
|           | ranged weapon built directly into its body, and   |   |   |
|           | can make the following attack:                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **R: Spike-thrower +9 vs AC (1d3 nearby enemies,  |   |   |
|           | or 1d3+1 nearby enemies in a group)**---10 damage |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Phantom

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +12                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 6th     | **Chill touch +11 vs. AC**---14 negative energy   | A |   |
| level     | damage and 14 ongoing cold damage                 | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
| Spoiler   | **C: Poltergeist activity +11 vs. PD (1d6 nearby  | * |   |
|           | or faraway enemies in a group)**---13 damage      |   | 2 |
| Undead    |                                                   | * | 0 |
|           | *Immaterial:* As a quick action the phantom can   | * |   |
|           | become immaterial, phasing through solid objects, | P | 9 |
|           | but not ending its turn inside a solid object.    | D | 0 |
|           | Its *chill touch* attack takes a -2 attack        | * |   |
|           | penalty while it is immaterial, but all its       | * |   |
|           | defenses gain a +2 bonus against non-magical      |   |   |
|           | weapons and unarmed attacks. It is a quick action | * |   |
|           | for it to become material again.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Face of death:* The phantom changes its          | D |   |
|           | appearance to become terrifying. All nearby and   | * |   |
|           | faraway enemies with less than 60 hp must save or | * |   |
|           | become affected by fear (dazed and unable to use  |   |   |
|           | the escalation die) until the end of their next   | * |   |
|           | turn. Necromancers are immune to this effect.     | * |   |
|           | (Characters with active icon relationship         | H |   |
|           | advantages might also be able to dodge it,        | P |   |
|           | depending on the story they tell . . . .)         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Quick use:* 1/battle, as a quick action.         |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* While immaterial the phantom can fly.   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Personalized terror:* Those affected by the      |   |   |
|           | *face of death* must save to end their fear       |   |   |
|           | instead of it ending at the end of their next     |   |   |
|           | turn.                                             |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Tempter

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 7th    | **Supernatural strength +12 vs. AC**---60 damage | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural 16, 18, or 20 hit or miss:* The target  | * | 1 |
| Blocker  | is thrown faraway from the tempter.              | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | *Natural 15, 17, or 19 hit:* The target is       | * | 1 |
|          | hampered until the end of its next turn.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | **C: Steal breath +12 vs. PD (one nearby         | D | 0 |
|          | enemy)**---25 negative energy damage and 20      | * | 4 |
|          | ongoing negative energy damage                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Natural 16, 18, or 20 hit or miss:* The target  | * |   |
|          | is pulled into engagement with the tempter.      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          | *Natural 15, 17, or 19 hit:* While the target is | D |   |
|          | taking the ongoing damage it is also hampered    | * |   |
|          | (basic attacks only).                            | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 negative energy damage.               | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Special]{.underline}                    | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Shatter:* Normal non-magical armor and shields  | * |   |
|          | shatter under this monster's *supernatural       | * |   |
|          | strength* attack. When the tempter crits, the if |   |   |
|          | the target is wearing non-magical heavy armor    |   |   |
|          | the armor is destroyed (count as a -4 penalty to |   |   |
|          | AC until the end of the battle).                 |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Death Knight

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 5 |
| 8th    | **Soul-piercing spear +13 vs. AC**---50 damage   | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Hit or miss, attack beats MD:* 50 ongoing       | * | 2 |
| Wrecker  | negative energy damage.                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | **R: Chilling gaze +13 vs. MD**---Target is      | * | 8 |
|          | stuck (save ends)                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 2 |
|          | *First failed save against stuck:* Target is     | D | 6 |
|          | also dazed (save ends both).                     | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Second failed save against stuck:* Target is    |   |   |
|          | now weakened instead of dazed (save ends both).  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Third failed save against stuck:* Target is     | M |   |
|          | stunned instead of stuck and weakened (save      | D |   |
|          | ends).                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Target fails to save against stunned:* Target   |   |   |
|          | is helpless (save ends).                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Death aura:* Nearby targets who attack the      |   |   |
|          | death knight and roll a 1 take 20 negative       |   |   |
|          | energy damage.                                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Phantomaton horse:* If the death knight is      |   |   |
|          | riding a phantomaton horse, the phantomaton      |   |   |
|          | isn't strong enough to do a whole lot on its     |   |   |
|          | own, just count it as a nastier special while    |   |   |
|          | ignoring the phantomaton's other stats. As a     |   |   |
|          | standard action the phantomaton horse can make   |   |   |
|          | the following attack on its turn while it is     |   |   |
|          | still mid-move:                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Trample +13 vs. AC**---20 damage               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Golden Eye Necromancer

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 3×       | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 8th    | **Fickle finger of fate +13 vs. AC**---60        | A |   |
| level    | negative energy damage                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Caster   | *Natural even hit:* 60 ongoing negative energy   | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   | 2 |
| Undead   |                                                  | * | 2 |
| or       | *Natural odd hit:* A nearby undead ally of the   | * |   |
| Humanoid | necromancer gains 60 temporary hp.               | P | 4 |
|          |                                                  | D | 5 |
|          | *Miss:* 30 negative energy damage.               | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **R: Call the dead +13 vs. PD (1d3 nearby or     |   |   |
|          | faraway enemies in a group)**---60 ongoing       | * |   |
|          | damage and the targets are stuck (save ends      | * |   |
|          | both) as ghostly hands burst up from the ground  | M |   |
|          | to restrain them.                                | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Miss:* One nearby mook dies, and the            | * |   |
|          | necromancer or one of their nearby undead allies |   |   |
|          | heals 20 hp. If there are no nearby mooks for    | * |   |
|          | the necromancer to slay there is no miss effect. | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Control undead:* Each turn roll a d6---if the   | P |   |
|          | result is equal to or higher than the escalation | * |   |
|          | die, then any undead allies of the PCs turn on   | * |   |
|          | them until the end of the round. If any of the   |   |   |
|          | PCs are UNDEAD, or are under the effects of      |   |   |
|          | zombie form, ghoul form, ghost form, vampiric    |   |   |
|          | form, or similar then they must save or become   |   |   |
|          | confused until the end of their next turn.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\] Undying melody:* When an    |   |   |
|          | ally of the necromancer dies it instead heals to |   |   |
|          | full hp and its creature type becomes UNDEAD if  |   |   |
|          | it was not already.                              |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *\[Once per battle\] Revolving door of undeath:* |   |   |
|          | If the necromancer starts the combat as a living |   |   |
|          | HUMANOID, then when it dies instead its type     |   |   |
|          | becomes UNDEAD and it instantly heals to 226 hp. |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Vampire

#### Vampire Spawn

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 0 |
| 6th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Claw +10 vs. AC**---18 damage                   | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The vampire spawn can make a  |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *fangs* attack against the target as a free       | * | 5 |
|           | action.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **Fangs +14 vs. AC**---7    | D | 0 |
|           | damage, and a humanoid target is weakened (--4    | * |   |
|           | attack and defenses) until the end of the vampire | * |   |
|           | spawn's next turn                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Spawn of the Master

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +16                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 10th    | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 2 |
|           | **Claws and fangs +15 vs. AC**---30 damage        | * | 3 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 18+:* If the target is staggered, it is  |   | 2 |
| Undead    | also hampered until the end of its next turn.     | * | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 5 |
|           |                                                   | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Vampire

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +15                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 10th   | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Deathly touch +15 vs. PD**---50 negative       | * | 0 |
| Spoiler  | energy damage                                    | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 2 |
| Undead   | *Natural 11+:* The target is also weakened until | * | 6 |
|          | the end of its next turn (--4 attacks and        | * |   |
|          | defenses). In addition, the target expends one   | P | 2 |
|          | unused limited trait (a spell, power, or talent  | D | 2 |
|          | with a once-per-battle or daily use, but not     | * | 0 |
|          | magic item powers) of its choice.                | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Vampiric regeneration:* The vampire regenerates | * |   |
|          | 1 hp per level at the start of each round        | * |   |
|          | indefinitely, but it turns to mist if it drops   | M |   |
|          | to 0 hp (see below).                             | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Mist form:* Unless it is slain in a manner      | * |   |
|          | appropriate for truly killing vampires in the    |   |   |
|          | campaign, a vampire that drops to 0 hp drifts    | * |   |
|          | away to return and fight some other day.         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Vampiric compulsion +15 vs. MD (one enemy;  | * |   |
|          | see below)**---The target is confused and        |   |   |
|          | vulnerable (save ends)                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Limited use:* The vampire can use *vampiric     |   |   |
|          | compulsion* as a free action only when a nearby  |   |   |
|          | enemy attacks the vampire and misses with a      |   |   |
|          | natural attack roll of 1--5.                     |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Warbanner

Warbanners have a number of abilities in common. The feral warbanner has
the full version of these abilities. You may customize the feral
warbanner by giving it icon-associated abilities.

A warbanner generally commands large groups of mooks that are simple to
play. Creatures in a warbanner's band are allies fully under its
control. It could also have allies not in its band.

#### Feral Warbanner

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 2nd     | **Whipping barbed tassel +7 vs. AC**---10 damage  | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | * | 4 |
| Caster    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Banner magic**---Roll 2d20 and use each roll |   | 1 |
| Construct | (or a lower result of your choice) to determine   | * | 4 |
|           | one effect                                        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 7 |
|           | *1--5:* The warbanner's bearer can make a basic   | D | 0 |
|           | attack with a +2 attack bonus as a free action.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *6--10:* Each different enemy engaged with a      |   |   |
|           | creature in the warbanner's band takes 1d6        | * |   |
|           | psychic damage.                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *11--15:* If any mooks in the warbanner's band    | D |   |
|           | have dropped this battle, return one of those     | * |   |
|           | mooks to the battle next to the warbanner. (If    | * |   |
|           | the warbanner has no mooks in its band, choose a  |   |   |
|           | lower result.)                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *16--20:* The warbanner can make a *false rally*  | H |   |
|           | attack as a free action.                          | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: False rally +7 vs. MD  | * |   |
|           | (one nearby enemy with 12 hp or fewer)**---The    |   |   |
|           | target is confused (hard save ends, 16+)          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Critical hit:* The target can now only save      |   |   |
|           | against the confusion with a natural 20 (or until |   |   |
|           | the warbanner drops) and can't flee if the rest   |   |   |
|           | of the PCs choose to do so.                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Designated bearer:* Once per round as a quick    |   |   |
|           | action, the warbanner can fly directly above a    |   |   |
|           | lower-level ally in its band and designate that   |   |   |
|           | ally as its bearer. Alternately, it can release   |   |   |
|           | itself from a bearer and fly free.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Bearer beware:* While the warbanner has a bearer |   |   |
|           | it moves with the bearer and is engaged by        |   |   |
|           | enemies that engage the bearer. The bearer is     |   |   |
|           | vulnerable to all attacks but it can use the      |   |   |
|           | escalation die.                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Conditional resist damage 16+:* Unless an ally   |   |   |
|           | in the warbanner's band dropped to 0 hp since the |   |   |
|           | start of the current round, an enemy attacking    |   |   |
|           | the warbanner must roll a natural 16+ on the      |   |   |
|           | attack roll or it only takes half damage. This    |   |   |
|           | ability has no effect if the warbanner has no     |   |   |
|           | allies in its band.                               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* Warbanners fly quickly, fluttering in   |   |   |
|           | winds only they can feel, preferably never        |   |   |
|           | touching the ground. They can't fly off the       |   |   |
|           | ground higher than a flag on a pole can be        |   |   |
|           | carried into battle, so enemies on the ground can |   |   |
|           | still target them. At best, a warbanner might     |   |   |
|           | gain a +2 bonus to defenses against attacks made  |   |   |
|           | by small PCs like halflings and gnomes.           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Mook morale:* Mooks fighting in the warbanner's  |   |   |
|           | band gain a bonus to their hit points equal to    |   |   |
|           | the warbanner's level (2).                        |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Human Rabble

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +5                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 2nd     | **Spear, sword, or club +7 vs. AC**---4 damage    | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* 1 damage.                                 | * | 4 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 9 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Brute's Warbanner

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 3rd    | **Flagspear +9 vs. AC**---18 damage              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Miss:* 8 damage.                                | * | 6 |
| Caster   |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Banner magic**---Roll 2d20 and use each     |   | 1 |
| C        | roll (or a lower result of your choice) to       | * | 3 |
| onstruct | determine one effect                             | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *1--5:* The warbanner's bearer can make a basic  | D | 0 |
|          | attack with a +2 attack bonus as a free action.  | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *6--10:* Add a 3rd level orc mook to the       |   |   |
|          | warbanner's band.                                | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *11--15:* The warbanner can make a *flagspear*   | M |   |
|          | attack as a free action.                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *16--20:* The warbanner can make a *false rally* | * |   |
|          | attack as a free action.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: False rally +8 vs. MD | * |   |
|          | (one nearby enemy with 15 hp or fewer)**---The   | H |   |
|          | target is confused (hard save ends, 16+)         | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Critical hit:* The target can now only save     | * |   |
|          | against the confusion with a natural 20 (or      |   |   |
|          | until the warbanner drops) and can't flee if the |   |   |
|          | rest of the PCs choose to do so.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Designated bearer:* Once per round as a quick   |   |   |
|          | action, the warbanner can fly directly above a   |   |   |
|          | lower-level ally in its band and designate that  |   |   |
|          | ally as its bearer. Alternately, it can release  |   |   |
|          | itself from a bearer and fly free.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bearer beware:* While the warbanner has a       |   |   |
|          | bearer it moves with the bearer and is engaged   |   |   |
|          | by enemies that engage the bearer. The bearer is |   |   |
|          | vulnerable to all attacks but it can use the     |   |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Conditional resist damage 16+:* As feral        |   |   |
|          | warbanner.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* As feral warbanner.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mook morale:* Mooks fighting in the warbanner's |   |   |
|          | band gain a bonus to their hit points equal to   |   |   |
|          | the warbanner's level (3).                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Zealot's Warbanner

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×        | Initiative: +8                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 3rd     | **Whipping hook +8 vs. AC**---10 damage, and 10   | A |   |
| level     | ongoing damage                                    | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Caster    | *Miss:* 5 damage.                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Construct | **C: Banner magic**---Roll 2d20 and use each roll | * | 5 |
|           | (or a lower result of your choice) to determine   | * |   |
|           | one effect                                        | P | 8 |
|           |                                                   | D | 6 |
|           | *1--5:* The warbanner's bearer can make a basic   | * |   |
|           | attack with a +2 attack bonus as a free action.   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *6--10:* Each different enemy engaged with a      | * |   |
|           | creature in the warbanner's band takes 1d8        | * |   |
|           | psychic damage.                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *11--15:* Until the end of the battle, each ally  | * |   |
|           | in the warbanner's band gains a +2 cumulative     | * |   |
|           | bonus to damage on hits with melee attacks.       |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *16--20:* The warbanner can make a *false rally*  | * |   |
|           | attack as a free action.                          | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: False rally +8 vs. MD  | * |   |
|           | (one nearby enemy with 15 hp or fewer)**---The    | * |   |
|           | target is confused (hard save ends, 16+)          |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Critical hit:* The target can now only save      |   |   |
|           | against the confusion with a natural 20 (or until |   |   |
|           | the warbanner drops) and can't flee if the rest   |   |   |
|           | of the PCs choose to do so.                       |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Designated bearer:* Once per round as a quick    |   |   |
|           | action, the warbanner can fly directly above a    |   |   |
|           | lower-level ally in its band and designate that   |   |   |
|           | ally as its bearer. Alternately, it can release   |   |   |
|           | itself from a bearer and fly free.                |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Bearer beware:* While the warbanner has a bearer |   |   |
|           | it moves with the bearer and is engaged by        |   |   |
|           | enemies that engage the bearer. The bearer is     |   |   |
|           | vulnerable to all attacks but it can use the      |   |   |
|           | escalation die.                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Conditional resist damage 16+:* As feral         |   |   |
|           | warbanner.                                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Flight:* As feral warbanner.                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Mook morale:* Mooks fighting in the warbanner's  |   |   |
|           | band gain a bonus to their hit points equal to    |   |   |
|           | the warbanner's level (3).                        |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Deathly Warbanner

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +9                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 4th    | **Bladed fringe +8 vs. AC**---15 damage, and 10  | A |   |
| level    | ongoing negative energy damage                   | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| Caster   | *Miss:* 10 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| C        | **C: Banner magic**---Roll 2d20 and use each     | * | 8 |
| onstruct | roll (or a lower result of your choice) to       | * |   |
|          | determine one effect                             | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *1--5:* The warbanner's bearer can make a basic  | * | 4 |
|          | attack with a +2 attack bonus as a free action.  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *6--10:* Each different enemy engaged with a     | * |   |
|          | creature in the warbanner's band takes 1d10      | * |   |
|          | psychic damage.                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *11--15:* If any mooks in the warbanner's band   | * |   |
|          | have dropped this battle, return one of those    | * |   |
|          | mooks to the battle next to the warbanner. (If   |   |   |
|          | the warbanner has no mooks in its band, choose a | * |   |
|          | lower result.)                                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *16--20:* The warbanner can make a *false rally* | P |   |
|          | attack as a free action.                         | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: False rally +9 vs. MD |   |   |
|          | (one nearby enemy with 18 hp or fewer)**---The   |   |   |
|          | target is confused (hard save ends, 16+)         |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Critical hit:* The target can now only save     |   |   |
|          | against the confusion with a natural 20 (or      |   |   |
|          | until the warbanner drops) and can't flee if the |   |   |
|          | rest of the PCs choose to do so.                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Designated bearer:* Once per round as a quick   |   |   |
|          | action, the warbanner can fly directly above a   |   |   |
|          | lower-level ally in its band and designate that  |   |   |
|          | ally as its bearer. Alternately, it can release  |   |   |
|          | itself from a bearer and fly free.               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bearer beware:* While the warbanner has a       |   |   |
|          | bearer it moves with the bearer and is engaged   |   |   |
|          | by enemies that engage the bearer. The bearer is |   |   |
|          | vulnerable to all attacks but it can use the     |   |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Conditional resist damage 16+:* As feral        |   |   |
|          | warbanner.                                       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Flight:* As feral warbanner.                    |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Mook morale:* Mooks fighting in the warbanner's |   |   |
|          | band gain a bonus to their hit points equal to   |   |   |
|          | the warbanner's level (4).                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Wendigo

#### Ravenous Cannibal

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +9                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 8 |
| 4th     | **Bloody melee weapon +9 vs. AC**---4 damage, and | A |   |
| level     | 4 ongoing damage                                  | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| Mook      | **Latching bite +9 vs. AC (one staggered enemy,   | * |   |
|           | or one enemy making saving throw rolls)**---6     |   | 1 |
| Humanoid  | damage                                            | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit:* Add another ravenous cannibal | P | 1 |
|           | mook to the mob (it must have been hiding         | D | 3 |
|           | somewhere nearby, or wasn't really dead when it   | * |   |
|           | dropped earlier in the battle).                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wendigo Spirit

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +12                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Soul bite +10 vs. MD**---36 psychic damage,    | A |   |
| level    | and the target is affected by *wendigo's hunger* | C | 1 |
|          | (save ends)                                      | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Wendigo's hunger:* Until the target saves, roll |   | 1 |
| Undead   | 1d6 at the start of each of its turns. It takes  | * | 9 |
|          | the corresponding action for its full turn       | * |   |
|          | instead of its normal turn:                      | P | 1 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *1--2:* The target takes 10 damage as it bites   | * | 0 |
|          | itself.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *3--4:* The target makes a basic attack against  | * |   |
|          | its nearest or most vulnerable ally (moving to   | * |   |
|          | that target if necessary).                       | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *5--6:* The target attacks the wendigo if it     | * |   |
|          | can; otherwise, it does nothing.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Wind claw +10 vs. PD (2 attacks)**---15 damage | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* After the attack the wendigo | H |   |
|          | can teleport somewhere nearby as a free action.  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The wendigo can walk on the wind. It   | * |   |
|          | is not a graceful flyer, but it moves as fast as |   |   |
|          | the wind that carries it. Nearby creatures can   |   |   |
|          | see its feet blazing with fire as it runs.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Spirit form:* The wendigo has *resist damage    |   |   |
|          | 16+* to all damage except thunder damage. A      |   |   |
|          | wendigo spirit can move through solid objects    |   |   |
|          | but it can't end its movement inside them.       |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unseen horror:* The wendigo is invisible to     |   |   |
|          | faraway creatures. When the wendigo attacks, if  |   |   |
|          | its target couldn't see it at the start of its   |   |   |
|          | turn, the wendigo gains a +2 attack bonus that   |   |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Curse of the wendigo:* If a creature subject to |   |   |
|          | *wendigo's hunger* drops itself (through biting) |   |   |
|          | or an ally (with a basic attack) to 0 hp or      |   |   |
|          | lower, that creature also begins making last     |   |   |
|          | gasp saves. Failing the fourth last gasp save    |   |   |
|          | turns the creature into a raving cannibal; it    |   |   |
|          | loses all its normal abilities and becomes an    |   |   |
|          | NPC until the PCs find a way to restore their    |   |   |
|          | ally (at GM's discretion).                       |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Elder Wendigo

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Huge     | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| 9th    | **Icy claws +14 vs. PD (3 attacks, each against  | A |   |
| level    | a different nearby enemy)**---50 cold damage     | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| Spoiler  | *Frostburn:* If all three attacks hit, each      | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy takes 4d10 fire damage.             |   | 2 |
| Demon    |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | **C: Flame blizzard +14 vs. PD (1d6 nearby or    | * |   |
|          | faraway enemies, but not more than esc.          | P | 6 |
|          | die)**---90 fire or cold damage (GM choice)      | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered until | * |   |
|          | the end of its next turn.                        |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Horrific gaze +14 vs. MD (one nearby or     | * |   |
|          | faraway enemy)**---120 psychic damage, and the   | M |   |
|          | target is confused (save ends)                   | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Fourth failed confusion save:* The target slips | * |   |
|          | into madness and becomes a cannibal cultist or   |   |   |
|          | wendigo or some other terrible demon-thing of    | * |   |
|          | the GM's or player's choice in 2d10 hours.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          | *Miss:* 60 psychic damage.                       | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Flight:* The elder wendigo can walk on the      | * |   |
|          | wind. It is not a graceful flyer, but it moves   |   |   |
|          | as fast as the wind that carries it.             |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Swirling snow and fog and flame:* The elder     |   |   |
|          | wendigo gains a +5 bonus to all defenses against |   |   |
|          | attacks by faraway enemies.                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Force of disruption:* When the elder wendigo    |   |   |
|          | scores a critical hit against a target or drops  |   |   |
|          | a target to 0 hp or lower, that creature must    |   |   |
|          | permanently change one of its icon relationship  |   |   |
|          | points to a relationship with a different        |   |   |
|          | icon---one of a few that the GM chooses.         |   |   |
|          | Alternatively, a point the character already has |   |   |
|          | with one of those icons changes to involve       |   |   |
|          | another icon (of the PC's choice).               |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *The demon stares back:* Once per round when a   |   |   |
|          | nearby or faraway enemy attacks the elder        |   |   |
|          | wendigo and rolls a natural odd miss, the        |   |   |
|          | wendigo can make a *horrific gaze* attack        |   |   |
|          | against that attacker as a free action.          |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Werebeasts

Each werebeast can take one of three forms as a quick action once per
round: a humanoid form, a beast form, or a hybrid form that combines the
two. The hybrid form is the most powerful in combat, but the humanoid
and beast forms are useful for various activities outside of combat as
well.

The stats below work for the beast and hybrid forms. If a werebeast ends
up fighting in humanoid form, subtract 2 from all its defenses and halve
its normal attack damage.

The following powers are common for werebeasts.

*Beast heart (all three forms):* Animals of the werebeast's type are
intuitively on good terms with the were, even dire animals. If the
werebeast betrays them, however, retaliation is certain and merciless.

*Cursed bite (hybrid or animal form only):* While the moon is full, the
first time each battle a creature takes damage from a werebeast melee
attack, it takes 10 extra damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 40 damage).
The malignant curse, transmitted through the attack, shocks the mortal
flesh. Further attacks, even from weres of different types, don't cause
extra damage. Unless blessed, purged, or otherwise cured, the damaged
creature will turn into a werebeast on the night of the next full moon.
Heroes powerful enough to fight werebeasts can usually find benefactors
or rituals to cure them, but there's an exception to every rule. GM, if
you're unsure whether it's a full moon, roll a d10. On a 1--3, the moon
is full enough.

*Resilient shifting (all three forms):* As mentioned above, a werebeast
can shift forms once per round as a quick action. When a werebeast
shifts, it can roll a save against one save ends effect.

[Nastier Specials for all werebeasts]{.underline}

The following ability is extremely nasty when combined with the *bestial
fury* most werebeasts have. It's possibly better used as a story option,
a consequence of a problem with a skill check or an icon relationship,
or a situation that should have been avoided and may require sacrifices
to deal with:

*Moon fury (hybrid form only):* While fighting in moonlight, a werebeast
gains a bonus to damage equal to its level (champion: double its level;
epic: triple it).

#### Wererat

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 2nd     | **Infected bite +7 vs. AC**---2 damage and 2      | A |   |
| level     | ongoing damage, and the crit range for each       | C | 1 |
|           | wererat in the battle against the target expands  | * | 4 |
| Troop     | by 1 (cumulative)                                 | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Beast     | *Natural 11+:* The target can't make opportunity  | * | 8 |
|           | attacks until the end of the turn (making it      | * |   |
|           | easier for the wererat to move away from the      | P | 3 |
|           | target).                                          | D | 4 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Hybrid miss:* While in hybrid form, when the     | * |   |
|           | wererat makes an opportunity attack with          |   |   |
|           | *infected bite*, it deals damage equal to its     | * |   |
|           | level on a miss.                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Unnatural vigor (hybrid or animal form only):*   | D |   |
|           | When the wererat is not staggered at the start of | * |   |
|           | its turn, it heals 5 hp.                          | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Bestial fury (hybrid form only):* Wererats gain  | * |   |
|           | a bonus to damage equal to the escalation die     | * |   |
|           | (champion: double the die; epic: quadruple the    | H |   |
|           | die).                                             | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Uncanny moves:* The wererat takes no damage and  |   |   |
|           | suffers no effects from attacks that miss.        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Piercing shriek:* Once per battle when the       |   |   |
|           | escalation die is 2+ and there are three or more  |   |   |
|           | wererats in the battle, a wererat can make a      |   |   |
|           | *piercing shriek* attack as a free action.        |   |   |
|           | Usually all the wererats in the battle will do    |   |   |
|           | this at the same time.                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | **C: Piercing shriek +7 vs. MD (the closest       |   |   |
|           | nearby enemy)**---4 damage                        |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Miss:* 2 damage.                                 |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Werewolf

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 3rd     | **Ravening bite +6 vs. AC**---10 damage           | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Miss:* The werewolf gains a +2 attack bonus      | * | 5 |
| Troop     | (cumulative) to *ravening bite* attacks until the | * |   |
|           | end of the battle.                                |   | 1 |
| Beast     |                                                   | * | 9 |
|           | *Bestial fury (hybrid form only):* Werewolves     | * |   |
|           | gain a bonus to damage equal to the escalation    | P | 4 |
|           | die (champion: double the die; epic: quadruple    | D | 2 |
|           | the die).                                         | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Pack attack:* When the werewolf attacks a        |   |   |
|           | creature that is engaged with one of its allies,  | * |   |
|           | the target is vulnerable to that attack.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           | *Unnatural vigor (hybrid or animal form only):*   | D |   |
|           | When the werewolf is not staggered at the start   | * |   |
|           | of its turn, it heals 6 hp.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Sustaining blood:* When the werewolf hits with a | H |   |
|           | ravening bite attack, it heals 4 hp.              | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Wereboar

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| 2×       | Initiative: +7                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 4th    | **Goring tusks +9 vs. AC (1d3 enemies)**---15    | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 6 |
| Troop    | *Slashing tusks:* While the escalation die is    | * |   |
|          | 3+, the crit range of this attack expands by 2.  |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Beastly grit:* When the wereboar takes 8 damage | * |   |
|          | or less from any source, it takes no damage      | P | 1 |
|          | instead.                                         | D | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Bestial durability:* The wereboar can roll      | * |   |
|          | normal saves against effects that aren't save    |   |   |
|          | ends (until end of turn or battle, for example). | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Bestial fury (hybrid form only):* Wereboars     | M |   |
|          | gain a bonus to damage equal to the escalation   | D |   |
|          | die (champion: double the die; epic: quadruple   | * |   |
|          | the die).                                        | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Unnatural vigor (hybrid or animal form only):*  | * |   |
|          | When the wereboar is not staggered at the start  | * |   |
|          | of its turn, it heals 18 hp.                     | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Vicious turn:* Once per battle, the wereboar    |   |   |
|          | can make a *smash* attack as a free action.      |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Smash +9 vs. PD**---The target is dazed (save  |   |   |
|          | ends)                                            |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Werebear

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 9 |
| 5th    | **Massive claws +10 vs. AC**---20 damage         | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The werebear grabs the target. As | * | 7 |
| Troop    | a standard action, it can make a *head chomp*    | * |   |
|          | attack against an enemy it's grabbing.           |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Head chomp +14 (includes | * |   |
|          | +4 grab bonus) vs. AC (one enemy it's            | P | 1 |
|          | grabbing)**---70 damage                          | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Miss:* 20 damage.                               | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bestial fury (hybrid form only):* Werebears     | * |   |
|          | gain a bonus to damage equal to the escalation   | * |   |
|          | die (champion: double the die; epic: quadruple   | M |   |
|          | the die).                                        | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Unnatural vigor (hybrid or animal form only):*  | * |   |
|          | When the werebear is not staggered at the start  |   |   |
|          | of its turn, it heals 20 hp.                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Chew on arm:* Instead of chomping on a grabbed  | * |   |
|          | enemy's head, the werebear can make an *arm      | * |   |
|          | crunch* attack against an enemy it's grabbing.   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | **Arm crunch +14 vs. AC**---70 damage, and the   |   |   |
|          | target is weakened until it regains maximum hit  |   |   |
|          | points                                           |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+


#### Weretiger

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +11                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 6th    | **Claws and bite +11 vs. AC**---20 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *First natural 11+ each turn:* The weretiger can | * | 8 |
| Troop    | make a second *claws and bite* attack as a free  | * |   |
|          | action.                                          |   | 2 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 2 |
|          | *Second natural 11+ each turn:* The weretiger    | * |   |
|          | can make a third *claws and bite* attack as a    | P | 1 |
|          | free action if the escalation die is 3+.         | D | 8 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Springing strike +11 vs. | * |   |
|          | AC**---25 damage                                 |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Limited use:* When an enemy engages the         | * |   |
|          | weretiger, if the weretiger isn't already        | M |   |
|          | engaged, it can make a *springing strike* attack | D |   |
|          | against that enemy as an interrupt action before | * |   |
|          | the attack.                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Bestial fury (hybrid form only):* Weretigers    | * |   |
|          | gain a bonus to damage equal to the escalation   | * |   |
|          | die (champion: double the die; epic: quadruple   | H |   |
|          | the die).                                        | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Unnatural vigor (hybrid or animal form only):*  | * |   |
|          | When the weretiger is not staggered at the start |   |   |
|          | of its turn, it heals 24 hp.                     |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Stymie:* When the weretiger hits with a         |   |   |
|          | *springing strike* attack, the target pops free  |   |   |
|          | from it and can't take any more actions that     |   |   |
|          | turn unless it succeeds on a save.               |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Whispering Prophet

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +15                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 5th     | **Tentacle caress +9 vs. PD**---12 damage, and    | A |   |
| level     | the target is vulnerable to psychic damage (save  | C | 1 |
|           | ends)                                             | * | 4 |
| Leader    |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Whispered secrets +10 vs. MD (1d3 nearby     |   | 2 |
| A         | enemies)**---5 psychic damage, and the target's   | * | 0 |
| berration | mind is filled with a delusional scene from its   | * |   |
|           | past that depends on the roll                     | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D | 2 |
|           | *Natural even hit:* The target is confused until  | * |   |
|           | the end of its next turn as it sees a foe from    | * |   |
|           | its past.                                         |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural odd hit:* The target is weakened until   | * |   |
|           | the end of its next turn as it remembers a past   | M |   |
|           | failure.                                          | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Rewards of the patron:* So long as the attack    | * |   |
|           | hits one or more targets, one ally of the         |   |   |
|           | prophet's choice gains a cumulative +1 attack     | * |   |
|           | bonus until the end of the battle that increases  | * |   |
|           | that ally's natural attack roll (so a roll of     | H |   |
|           | natural 15 becomes a roll of natural 16 with a +1 | P |   |
|           | bonus, or a natural 17 with a +2 bonus, etc.).    | * |   |
|           | The ally can choose not to use the bonus.         | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Saw it coming:* Twice per battle as a free       |   |   |
|           | action, the prophet can try to avoid a            |   |   |
|           | non-critical attack that hits it. The attacker    |   |   |
|           | must reroll the attack roll with a --4 penalty.   |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Knows the angles:* Twice per battle as a move    |   |   |
|           | action, the prophet can teleport to anywhere it   |   |   |
|           | can see, or to a location it can't see but that   |   |   |
|           | has the correct geometry and that it has          |   |   |
|           | previously prepared (a lair).                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Haruspicy master:* When an enemy has dropped to  |   |   |
|           | 0 hp or lower since the prophet's last turn, as a |   |   |
|           | quick action it can get a glimpse of the          |   |   |
|           | near-future. It grants 1d3 nearby allies a +4     |   |   |
|           | bonus to attacks and to all defenses until the    |   |   |
|           | start of its next turn.                           |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *A special secret:* When the prophet makes a      |   |   |
|           | *whispered secrets* attack, it can choose to      |   |   |
|           | target only one nearby enemy. If it does, it      |   |   |
|           | gains a +4 attack bonus against that enemy and    |   |   |
|           | the hit effects are save ends.                    |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Wibble

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +1                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| 1st     | **R: Force burp spell +6 vs. PD**---4 force       | A |   |
| level     | damage                                            | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| Mook      | *Disengaged:* Wibbles gain a +5 bonus to          | * |   |
|           | disengage checks. They also don't remain engaged  |   | 1 |
| Construct | with their foes and will move every turn in       | * | 3 |
|           | battle. When they fail a disengage check, a       | * |   |
|           | wibble moves away anyway.                         | P | 6 |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Eruptive blorp:* When an enemy hits a wibble     | * |   |
|           | with a melee attack, it takes force damage equal  | * |   |
|           | to its level.                                     |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Flight:* Wibbles waft about. They can fly well   | * |   |
|           | enough to ignore most wind, but not strong gale   | M |   |
|           | winds.                                            | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Whiff and wibble:* When a creature makes a       | * |   |
|           | non-spell attack against a wibble and rolls a     |   |   |
|           | natural 1--2, 1d3 new wibbles are created in the  | * |   |
|           | same area. These new wibbles typically melt back  | * |   |
|           | into their "parent" at the end of a battle if not | H |   |
|           | destroyed, but sometimes they remain separate and | P |   |
|           | drift off on their own.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Wight

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
| 4th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Sword +9 vs. AC**---10 damage                   | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Unless the wight is   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | staggered, the attack also deals 8 ongoing        | * | 3 |
|           | negative energy damage.                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 4 |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | D | 8 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Barrow-touch:* The wight's attacks against       | * |   |
|           | enemies taking ongoing negative energy damage are |   |   |
|           | against PD instead of AC and their crit range     | * |   |
|           | expands by 2.                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Wraith

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +10                                   | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 9 |
| 5th     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Ice-cold ghost blade +10 vs. PD**---14 negative | * | 4 |
| Spoiler   | energy damage                                     | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Natural 16+:* The target is also weakened (save  | * | 7 |
|           | ends).                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | P | 6 |
|           | **C: Spiraling assault +10 vs. PD (1d3 nearby     | D | 6 |
|           | enemies)**---10 negative energy damage, and after | * |   |
|           | the attack the wraith teleports to and engages    | * |   |
|           | with one target it hit                            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Limited use:* The wraith can use *spiraling      | * |   |
|           | assault* only when the escalation die is even.    | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.        | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Ghostly:* This creature has *resist damage 16+*  |   |   |
|           | to all damage (including holy damage) except      | * |   |
|           | force damage, which damages it normally.          | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           | A wraith can move through solid objects, but it   | P |   |
|           | can't end its movement inside them.               | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Drain life:* The wraith heals half the damage it |   |   |
|           | deals when it hits with a *natural 18+* attack    |   |   |
|           | roll.                                             |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Wyvern

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +10                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
| 5th    | **Tearing jaws +10 vs. AC**---35 damage          | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The wyvern can make a        | * | 9 |
| Wrecker  | *deadly tail stinger* attack during its next     | * |   |
|          | turn.                                            |   | 1 |
| Beast    |                                                  | * | 4 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **Deadly tail stinger +10  | * |   |
|          | vs. PD**---15 damage, and the target takes 10    | P | 1 |
|          | ongoing poison damage (difficult save ends, 16+) | D | 4 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | *Flight:* As the standard monster ability.       | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Escalating poison:* Add the escalation die to   | M |   |
|          | the wyvern's ongoing poison damage whenever that | D |   |
|          | damage is dealt.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Xorn

[Abilities for All Xorn]{.underline}

All xorn have the following abilities:

*Rock swimming:* As a move action the xorn can swim through the ground,
or through a wall.

*360 degree vision:* The xorn can't be surprised, and rogues can't use
their Sneak Attack class feature on them.

*Penetrating vision:* The xorn can see through all types of rock and
soil for some distance, let's say "nearby".

*Resist cold and fire 16+:* Xorn are used to the fires of the deep and
the cold of solid rock---when a cold or fire attack targets a xorn, the
attacker must roll a natural 16+ on the attack roll or it only deals
half damage.

[Lesser Xorn](Monsters/Monster-Reference/Elemental/Xorn/Lesser%20Xorn.md)

#### Great Xorn

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Elite    | Initiative: +14                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 8th    | **Claw claw claw +13 vs. AC (3 attacks)**---16   | A |   |
| level    | damage                                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
| Troop    | *Second hit against the same target in a round:* | * |   |
|          | Make a *bite* attack against the target as a     |   | 2 |
| E        | free action.                                     | * | 2 |
| lemental |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **Bite +15 vs. AC**---20 damage, and 15 ongoing  | P | 2 |
|          | damage                                           | D | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * | 0 |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Eruption:* When the xorn moves out of the floor | * |   |
|          | or wall or ceiling into engagement with an       | * |   |
|          | enemy, deal 6d6 damage to that enemy.            | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          | *Xorn 'cleric':* Twice per battle as a quick     | * |   |
|          | action (once per round), the xorn can heal 20    | * |   |
|          | hit points.                                      |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Xorn 'fighter':* The xorn's attacks deal half   | * |   |
|          | damage on a miss.                                | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | *Xorn 'rogue':* Once per battle when the xorn    | * |   |
|          | attacks immediately after swimming out from      | * |   |
|          | rock, it can deal double damage on a hit.        |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Xorn 'wizard':* When an enemy rolls a natural   |   |   |
|          | odd spell attack against the xorn, it only deals |   |   |
|          | half damage. In addition, a natural 1 means that |   |   |
|          | the spell is reflected back at the caster (the   |   |   |
|          | enemy rerolls the attack against itself).        |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Zombie

#### Zombie Shuffler

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +0                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 1st     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Rotting fist +5 vs. AC**---3 damage             | * | 2 |
| Mook      |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* Both the zombie and its target     |   | 8 |
| Undead    | take 1d4 damage!                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * | 1 |
|           | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a zombie       | P | 0 |
|           | shuffler deals triple damage instead of the       | D |   |
|           | normal double damage for a crit.                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | M |   |
|           |                                                   | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Human Zombie

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +1                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 5 |
| 2nd     | Vulnerability: holy                               | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | **Rotting fist +7 vs. AC**---6 damage             | * | 3 |
| Troop     |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* Both the zombie and its target     |   | 9 |
| Undead    | take 1d6 damage!                                  | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * | 6 |
|           | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a zombie drops | P | 0 |
|           | it to 0 hp.                                       | D |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Eat brains:* More dangerous zombies don't try to | * |   |
|           | kill the moving targets before feasting on        | * |   |
|           | brains; they keep attacking any enemy they've     | M |   |
|           | knocked unconscious, rolling attacks against the  | D |   |
|           | helpless enemy until it's dead.                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Zombie Beast

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +1                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 4 |
| 2nd    | **Smash +7 vs. AC**---20 damage, and the zombie  | A |   |
| level    | can only attack using *gutburst* during its next | C | 1 |
|          | turn                                             | * | 2 |
| Troop    |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural 16+:* Both the zombie and its target    |   | 8 |
| Undead   | take 2d6 damage.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * | 1 |
|          | *\[Special trigger\]* **C: Gutburst +6 vs. PD    | P | 1 |
|          | (up to 2 nearby enemies)**---The target takes 3  | D | 0 |
|          | ongoing acid damage from a spray of stinking     | * |   |
|          | zombified gut juice. The zombie takes 1d6        | * |   |
|          | damage.                                          |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Headshot:* The first time an enemy crits the    | * |   |
|          | zombie, the beast must roll a save. If it        | M |   |
|          | succeeds, it takes normal crit damage. If it     | D |   |
|          | fails, it drops to 0 hp. A second crit just      | * |   |
|          | drops the thing.                                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Ghastly thrashing:* When the zombie beast is    | H |   |
|          | first staggered, it makes a *thrash* attack as a | P |   |
|          | free action.                                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Thrash +7 vs. PD (each enemy engaged with   |   |   |
|          | it)**---15 damage                                |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Big Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +3                                   | * | 1 |
|          |                                                  | * | 7 |
| 4th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 1 |
|          | **Club or club-like fists +9 vs. AC**---22       | * | 5 |
| Wrecker  | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Natural even hit or miss:* Both the zombie and  | * | 2 |
|          | its target take 4d6 damage!                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a zombie      | D | 6 |
|          | drops it to 0 hp.                                | * | 0 |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Zombie of the Silver Rose

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +7                                    | * | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 7 |
| 4th     | **Iron-hard hands +9 vs. AC**---7 damage          | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* Both the zombie and   | * | 5 |
| Mook      | its target take 1d6 damage.                       | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   | 1 |
| Undead    | *Hand of the fallen:* When a melee attack drops   | * | 1 |
|           | one or more Silver Rose mooks, the hand of one of | * |   |
|           | those zombies ends up severed from its owner and  | P | 2 |
|           | latched onto a nearby enemy. The afflicted        | D | 0 |
|           | creature is vulnerable to all attacks until the   | * |   |
|           | hand is removed, which takes a standard action by | * |   |
|           | that creature or an ally next to them.            |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Shot to the head:* When an attack drops this     | * |   |
|           | zombie and it had 2, 4, or 6 hp remaining, the    | M |   |
|           | attack deals the same amount of damage to another | D |   |
|           | member of the mob. If this zombie has any other   | * |   |
|           | number of hit points left? No hit to the head.    | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Curse of failure:* Each round, one zombie mook   | H |   |
|           | in the Silver Rose mob can make a *curse* attack  | P |   |
|           | as a quick action.                                | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **C: Curse +4 vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**---The   |   |   |
|           | target is weakened until the start of the         |   |   |
|           | zombie's next turn.                               |   |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Mob rule:* The *curse* gains an attack bonus     |   |   |
|           | equal to the number of Silver Rose zombies in the |   |   |
|           | battle.                                           |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Giant Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Large    | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| 9th    | Vulnerability: holy                              | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | **Club or club-like fists +14 vs. AC**---50      | * | 1 |
| Mook     | damage                                           | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | *Natural even hit or miss:* Both the zombie and  | * | 7 |
|          | its target take 6d10 damage!                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  | P | 1 |
|          | *Headshot:* A critical hit against a giant       | D | 0 |
|          | zombie mook deals triple damage instead of the   | * | 0 |
|          | normal double damage for a crit.                 | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Double-strength mook:* The giant zombie mook    | * |   |
|          | counts as two 9th level mooks when you are     | * |   |
|          | building battles.                                | M |   |
|          |                                                  | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Headless Zombie

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +8                                   | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 2 |
| 9th    | **Flailing fists +10 vs. AC**---25 damage        | A |   |
| level    |                                                  | C | 2 |
|          | *Natural even hit or miss:* Both the zombie and  | * | 0 |
| Troop    | the target take 3d10 damage.                     | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   | 1 |
| Undead   | **R: Mouthless cry +10 vs. MD (1d3 closest       | * | 7 |
|          | nearby enemies)**---The target is dazed (save    | * |   |
|          | ends)                                            | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 7 |
|          | *Natural 16+:* The target takes 20 psychic       | * | 0 |
|          | damage.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Death spasms:* When a headless zombie drops to  | * |   |
|          | 0 hp, it flails with its fists and makes a       | * |   |
|          | *mouthless cry* attack as a free action before   | M |   |
|          | it dies.                                         | D |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Inevitable hunger:* When a creature tries to    | * |   |
|          | affect the zombie's attack, such as forcing a    |   |   |
|          | reroll or applying a penalty, it must roll a     | * |   |
|          | normal save; on a failure, the effect is         | * |   |
|          | negated.                                         | H |   |
|          |                                                  | P |   |
|          | [Nastier Specials]{.underline}                   | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Baleful aura:* While nearby a headless zombie,  |   |   |
|          | when a creature would heal, it only heals half   |   |   |
|          | the normal hit points.                           |   |   |
|          |                                                  |   |   |
|          | *Necrotic supremacy:* When the escalation die    |   |   |
|          | increases to 6, each headless zombie in the      |   |   |
|          | battle is restored to maximum hit points,        |   |   |
|          | including the dead ones.                         |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

### Zorigami

#### Dawn Zorigami

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +6                                    | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 2 |
| 3rd     | **Headbutt +8 vs. AC**---10 damage, and the       | A |   |
| level     | target moves down 1d6 points in initiative order  | C | 1 |
|           |                                                   | * | 3 |
| Spoiler   | **R: Ray of wasted time +8 vs. MD (1d3 nearby     | * |   |
|           | enemies or one faraway enemy)**---5 psychic       |   | 1 |
| Construct | damage, and 5 ongoing psychic damage              | * | 7 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Natural 16+:* The target also moves down 1d6     | P | 3 |
|           | points in initiative order.                       | D | 0 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *A moment of silence:* The escalation die does    | * |   |
|           | not increase the round after a dawn zorigami      |   |   |
|           | drops to 0 hp.                                    | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *On pause:* A creature that is reduced to a       | M |   |
|           | negative initiative count in a battle involving   | D |   |
|           | one or more dawn zorigami moves forward in time,  | * |   |
|           | reappearing somewhere nearby in a number of       | * |   |
|           | minutes equal to their negative initiative count, |   |   |
|           | presumably long after the current battle is over. | * |   |
|           | The target may be confused by this effect, since  | * |   |
|           | the ways of zorigami are mysterious.              | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Apex Zorigami

+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal    | Initiative: +11                                   | * | 2 |
|           |                                                   | * | 4 |
| 6th     | **Multi-geared mace +11 vs. AC**---20 damage      | A |   |
| level     |                                                   | C | 1 |
|           | *Natural even hit or miss:* The target can't use  | * | 7 |
| Spoiler   | the bonuses and powers of one of its randomly     | * |   |
|           | determined true magic items until the end of the  |   | 1 |
| Construct | battle.                                           | * | 9 |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | **R: Spray of sharpened gears +11 vs. AC (1d3     | P | 7 |
|           | nearby enemies or one faraway enemy)**---15       | D | 5 |
|           | damage                                            | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Miss:* 8 damage.                                 |   |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           | *Lethal parries:* When an enemy engaged with the  | * |   |
|           | apex zorigami misses it with an attack, the apex  | M |   |
|           | zorigami rolls a normal save; on a success, it    | D |   |
|           | can make a *multi-geared mace* attack as a free   | * |   |
|           | action.                                           | * |   |
|           |                                                   |   |   |
|           | *Take five:* The escalation die does not increase | * |   |
|           | the round after an apex zorigami is staggered or  | * |   |
|           | drops to 0 hp.                                    | H |   |
|           |                                                   | P |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
|           |                                                   | * |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|           |                                                   |   |   |
+-----------+---------------------------------------------------+---+---+

#### Dusk Zorigami

+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
| Normal   | Initiative: +18                                  | * | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 8 |
| 10th   | **Arm full of blades +15 vs. AC (2               | A |   |
| level    | attacks)**---30 damage                           | C | 2 |
|          |                                                  | * | 3 |
| Wrecker  | *Natural even hit:* The target is hampered (save | * |   |
|          | ends).                                           |   | 2 |
| C        |                                                  | * | 3 |
| onstruct | *Natural odd hit:* The target can't heal using   | * |   |
|          | its own recoveries (save ends).                  | P | 2 |
|          |                                                  | D | 0 |
|          | *Natural 1--5:* The dusk zorigami can make a     | * | 0 |
|          | *shaking the hourglass* attack against a single  | * |   |
|          | target as a free action.                         |   |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | **C: Shaking the hourglass +15 vs. MD (each      | * |   |
|          | nearby enemy not engaged with a zorigami)**---20 | M |   |
|          | psychic damage, and the target is vulnerable     | D |   |
|          | (save ends)                                      | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural even hit:* The escalation die increases |   |   |
|          | by one.                                          | * |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *Natural odd hit:* The escalation die decreases  | H |   |
|          | by one.                                          | P |   |
|          |                                                  | * |   |
|          | *The ticking clock of its own mortality:* While  | * |   |
|          | it's staggered, the dusk zorigami uses the       |   |   |
|          | escalation die.                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+
|          |                                                  |   |   |
+----------+--------------------------------------------------+---+---+

## Monster Creation

### Initiative

Establish a monster's initiative bonus by adding its level to a modifier
between --1 and +9.

  ------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Modifier    Speed                             Example
  ----------- --------------------------------- --------------------------
  --1         Super-slow and utterly clumsy     oozes, zombies

  +0          Slow and clumsy                   animated statues

  +1          Awkward or small                  city guards, dire rats

  +2          Average                           hellhound, human thug

  +3          Just above average                derro sage

  +4          Quick                             owlbear

  +5          Fast                              wyvern

  +6          Really fast                       gnoll ranger

  +7          Fast like a fast PC               ogre mage

  +8          Blindingly fast                   rakshasa

  +9          Competing with the rogue          
  ------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Attack Bonus

Add or subtract 1 to adjust how accurate a monster is.

### Strike Damage

Orient yourself around the average damage for a monster's attack at any
given level. When it comes to large (or double-strength) or huge (or
triple-strength) monsters, you don't have to put all their damage into
one strike. Split damage up into smaller attacks or use conditional
follow-up attacks.

### HP & AC

Use the defense numbers as the top-end rather than the baseline unless
you want the difficulty to scale up.

### Better Defense/Lesser Defense

Make either PD or MD better than the other, in general.

### Fear Threshold

If the monster has a fear ability, it's the number of hit points where
creatures are dazed (--4 attack) while engaged with the monster and
can't use the escalation die. It's based on level, so that higher-level
monsters are more fearsome.

### Stat Adjustments

Ad hoc adjustments work fine when limited to adjustments of 1 or 2
points. If you raise a couple scores, drop a couple others.

-   Scrapper: Sharp but thin: attacks +1 to +3, hp --10% to --30%

-   Offensive: Soft but strong: defenses --1 to --3, attacks +1 to +3

-   Oaf: Tough but clumsy: AC +1 to +3, attacks --1 to --3

-   Defensive: Tough but weak: AC +1 to +3, hp --10% to --30%

-   Lunk: Big and squishy: hp +15% to +40%, defenses --1 to --3

-   Brittle: Tough but thin: +1 to +3 AC, hp --10% to --30%

If you want to add a full level to a monster...

-   ...and you only want to boost its attack: Give the monster a +6
    attack boost.

-   ...and you only want to boost AC: Give the monster a +6 AC boost.

-   ...and you only want to increase the monster's hit points: Double
    the monster's hit points.

-   ...and you only want to increase the damage the monster deals: Add a
    second attack or ongoing damage.

-   ...and you only want to increase every stat: Add +1 to attack, +1 to
    all defenses, multiply its damage output by 1.25, and multiply its
    hit points by 1.25.

### Powers to Avoid

Avoid defensive powers that make it harder for the monsters to be killed
unless there's an offense to unlock the defense.

### Baseline Stats for Normal Monsters

  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Monster    Attack    Strike     HP    AC   Better     Lesser     Fear
  Level      Bonus     Damage                Defense    Defense    threshold
                                                                   (HP)
  ---------- --------- ---------- ----- ---- ---------- ---------- ------------
  0          5         4          20    16   14         10         7

  1          6         5          27    17   15         11         9

  2          7         7          36    18   16         12         12

  3          8         10         45    19   17         13         15

  4          9         14         54    20   18         14         18

  5          10        18         72    21   19         15         24

  6          11        21         90    22   20         16         30

  7          12        28         108   23   21         17         36

  8          13        38         144   24   22         18         48

  9          14        50         180   25   23         19         60

  10         15        58         216   26   24         20         72

  11         16        70         288   27   25         21         96

  12         17        90         360   28   26         22         120

  13         18        110        432   29   27         23         144

  14         19        135        576   30   28         24         192
  -----------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Baseline Stats for Mooks

  -------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Monster    Attack    Strike     Damage to kill AC   Better     Lesser
  Level      Bonus     Damage     one (HP)            Defense    Defense
  ---------- --------- ---------- -------------- ---- ---------- ----------
  0          5         3          5              16   14         10

  1          6         4          7              17   15         11

  2          7         5          9              18   16         12

  3          8         6          11             19   17         13

  4          9         7          14             20   18         14

  5          10        9          18             21   19         15

  6          11        12         23             22   20         16

  7          12        18         27             23   21         17

  8          13        23         36             24   22         18

  9          14        31         45             25   23         19

  10         15        37         54             26   24         20

  11         16        46         72             27   25         21

  12         17        60         90             28   26         22

  13         18        74         108            29   27         23

  14         19        90         144            30   28         24
  -------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Baseline Stats for Large or Double-Strength Monsters

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Monster   Attack   Strike    HP     AC   Better     Lesser     Fear
  Level     Bonus    Damage                Defense    Defense    threshold
                                                                 (HP)
  --------- -------- --------- ------ ---- ---------- ---------- ------------
  0         5        9         41     16   14         10         7

  1         6        10        54     17   15         11         9

  2         7        14        72     18   16         12         12

  3         8        21        90     19   17         13         15

  4         9        28        108    20   18         14         18

  5         10       36        144    21   19         15         24

  6         11       42        180    22   20         16         30

  7         12       56        216    23   21         17         36

  8         13       76        288    24   22         18         48

  9         14       100       360    25   23         19         60

  10        15       116       432    26   24         20         72

  11        16       140       576    27   25         21         96

  12        17       180       720    28   26         22         120

  13        18       220       864    29   27         23         144

  14        19       270       1152   30   28         24         192
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

### Baseline Stats for Huge or Triple-Strength Monsters

  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------
  Monster   Attack   Strike    HP     AC   Better     Lesser     Fear
  Level     Bonus    Damage                Defense    Defense    threshold
                                                                 (HP)
  --------- -------- --------- ------ ---- ---------- ---------- ------------
  0         5        12        60     16   14         10         7

  1         6        15        81     17   15         11         9

  2         7        21        108    18   16         12         12

  3         8        30        135    19   17         13         15

  4         9        42        162    20   18         14         18

  5         10       54        216    21   19         15         24

  6         11       63        270    22   20         16         30

  7         12       84        324    23   21         17         36

  8         13       114       432    24   22         18         48

  9         14       150       540    25   23         19         60

  10        15       174       648    26   24         20         72

  11        16       210       864    27   25         21         96

  12        17       270       1080   28   26         22         120

  13        18       330       1296   29   27         23         144

  14        19       405       1728   30   28         24         192
  ---------------------------------------------------------------------------

## Underkrakens

While not monsters in and of themselves, underkrakens are enormous,
city-sized dungeons in which monsters (like soul flensers) abide. They
may be alive, or they may be complex vehicles, or colonies from another
dimension or unknown portion of the world.
