---
aliases: 
created: 2023-05-13
description: 
image: 
modifier: 
publish: 
tags: 
updated: 2023-05-13
---

## Combat Rules

Combat is played with various sided dice. You make attack rolls against  
defense numbers and deal damage against hit points.

### Combat Sequence

At the start of combat, each player rolls initiative for his or her  
character and the GM rolls for their opponents, with higher-rolling  
characters or enemies acting earlier each round.

#### Cyclic Initiative

##### Roll Once

Each creature rolls to determine its initiative at the start of its  
first turn in battle (d20 + initiative bonus). Use those results to  
determine who goes first each round.

All monsters of the same exact type share the same initiative roll.

##### Delay

By choosing to delay, you take no action and then act normally on  
whatever initiative count you decide to act. When you delay, you  
voluntarily reduce your own initiative for the rest of the combat. Your  
initiative result becomes the count on which you took the delayed  
action.

If you come to your next action and have not yet performed an action,  
you don’t get to take a delayed action (though you can delay again).

If you take a delayed action in the next round, before your regular turn  
comes up, your initiative count rises to that new point in the order of  
battle, and you do not get your regular action that round.

##### Readying an Action

The ready action lets you prepare to take an action later, after your  
turn is over but before your next one has begun. Readying is a standard  
action.

You can ready a standard action, a move action, or a free action. To do  
so, specify the action you will take and the conditions under which you  
will take it. Then, any time before your next action, you may take the  
readied action in response to that condition. The action occurs just  
before the action that triggers it. If the triggered action is part of  
another character’s activities, you interrupt the other character.  
Assuming he is still capable of doing so, he continues his actions once  
you complete your readied action. Your initiative result changes. For  
the rest of the encounter, your initiative result is the count on which  
you took the readied action, and you act immediately ahead of the  
character whose action triggered your readied action.

Your initiative result becomes the count on which you took the readied  
action. If you come to your next action and have not yet performed your  
readied action, you don’t get to take the readied action (though you can  
ready the same action again). If you take your readied action in the  
next round, before your regular turn comes up, your initiative count  
rises to that new point in the order of battle, and you do not get your  
regular action that round.

#### Actions on Your Turn

##### Standard, Move, and Quick Actions

Each turn you can take one of each action, in any order. See Combat  
Actions.

###### Free Actions

You can take any number of free actions on your turn, as allowed by the  
GM. Creatures can also take free actions when it’s not their turn as  
part of a triggering condition. Talking is a free action.

###### Make Saves Last

If you are subjected to an ongoing effect that requires a save, roll  
that save at the end of your turn, after the ongoing effect.

#### Escalation Die

The escalation die represents a bonus to attacks as the fight goes on.

At the start of the second round, the GM sets the escalation die at 1.  
Each PC gains a bonus to attack rolls equal to the current value on the  
escalation die. Each round, the escalation die advances by +1, to a  
maximum of +6.

Monsters and NPCs do not add the escalation die bonus to their attacks

If the GM judges that the characters are avoiding conflict rather than  
bringing the fight to the bad guys, the escalation die doesn't advance.  
If combat virtually ceases, the escalation die resets to 0.

### Combat Actions

#### Actions

##### Regular Actions

On your turn, you can take one standard action, move action, and quick  
action, and a handful of free actions, in any order.

You can use a standard action to take a move action, and you can use a  
standard or move action to take a quick action.

##### Interrupt Actions

You can use one interrupt action when it’s not your turn. You can’t use  
another one until the end of your next turn. These types of actions are  
limited to certain classes and class powers.

##### Other Actions when it’s Not Your Turn

In certain circumstances, characters can intercept foes moving past  
them, make opportunity attacks, or otherwise act out of turn. These  
actions are usually free actions.

#### Position

A creature’s position amounts to two things: the creature’s whereabouts,  
and who it’s contending with in melee.

##### Whereabouts

Each creature has a general, relative position on the battlefield.  
Combat is dynamic and fluid, so miniatures can’t really represent where  
a character “really is.”

##### Nearby

Generally, all the heroes and their enemies in a battle are nearby. That  
means they can reach each other with a single move action.

##### Behind

If you’re behind an unengaged ally, and an enemy moves past that ally to  
get to you, your ally has the option to move and intercept.

##### Intercepting

You intercept a creature when you move to stop an enemy attempting to  
rush past you to attack someone else. You must be near the enemy and the  
person that enemy is trying to reach.

##### Faraway

Generally, the heroes and their enemies are nearby each other and you  
can use a single move action to reach any of them (provided no enemy  
intercepts you). If you want to be faraway, two moves away from the  
enemies, make that clear to the GM and make sure there’s room for that  
maneuver. Wizards and other casters sometimes like to be faraway.

##### Engaged/Next To

In a battle, each combatant is either engaged (locked in combat with one  
or more enemies) or unengaged (free). When two allies are engaged with  
the same enemy, they are considered next to each other.

#### Movement and Melee

The combat system cares about movement and position, but only in  
simple/approximate terms. It emphasizes where people are and who’s  
fighting whom.

##### Free

By default, characters in a battle are free. They can move freely, use  
ranged attacks, engage in battle, etc. If they try to move past a free  
enemy, however, that foe usually has the option to intercept them.

##### Engaged

Characters are engaged when they are in melee with foes. Engaged  
creatures can use melee attacks and close-quarter spells against the  
creatures they engage. They can use ranged attacks but doing so draws  
opportunity attacks from the enemies that are engaging them that they  
don’t attack, as does moving away from the enemies they’re engaged with.

Unengaged creatures have no particular limits on how they move. They  
can’t use melee attacks until engaged.

| When you are engaged:                                                                            | When you are unengaged:                                                                            |
|--------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|----------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------------|
| You draw opportunity attacks if you move                                                         | You move freely                                                                                    |
| You can make melee attacks against enemies engaged with you                                      | You can’t make melee attacks                                                                       |
| Your ranged attacks draw opportunity attacks from enemies engaged with you that you don’t target | You make ranged attacks normally                                                                   |
| Your spells draw opportunity attacks (except close-quarters spells)                              | You can cast spells freely                                                                         |
| You can disengage safely as a move action by making a normal save (11+)                          | You can engage enemies by moving into melee with them                                              |
| You can’t intercept enemies                                                                      | You can engage an enemy moving past you                                                            |
| You’re considered nearby other combatants by default                                             | You’re considered nearby other combatants by default, but you can usually move faraway if you want |

##### Disengaging

You can move away from the foes that engage you, but you draw an  
opportunity attack from each of those enemies when you do.

If you don’t want to risk an opportunity attack, you can use your move  
action to attempt to disengage (a disengage check). If you choose to  
disengage, roll a normal save (11+). You can disengage from more than  
one foe with a single successful check, but your roll takes a –1 penalty  
for each foe beyond the first that you are disengaging from.

If the disengage check succeeds, you can move without drawing  
opportunity attacks from the foes you were engaged with. Use your move  
normally.

If you fail the disengage check, you don’t move, lose your move action  
for that turn, and remain engaged. You don’t take any opportunity  
attacks.

Disengaging uses a move action. If you succeed, it’s like getting popped  
free at the start of your move. If you fail, you use up the move action  
to no effect.

When a creature gets to make an opportunity attack, it can make a basic  
melee attack against that foe as a free action during the turn of the  
creature that is provoking the opportunity attack. You can only use a  
basic melee attack.

##### Intercepting

If you move past someone who is not already engaged, they have the  
option to engage you and make you stop where they are. The GM rules on  
what counts as moving “past” a defending character or enemy.

##### Targeting

Important stats for targeting should be transparent to PCs. The GM  
should tell you whether your targets are legal targets, or whether  
they’re mooks, normal monsters, or large monsters.

A spell or area-style effect that targets multiple nearby enemies in a  
group can’t skip over enemies. You pick one target and attack the rest  
in order; you don’t skip all over the battlefield. Spells that say they  
target multiple nearby enemies but don’t specify that they have to be in  
a group are capable of sending magical energy in different directions,  
allowing spellcasters to choose targets from where they like.

When a spell or power targets a nearby enemy, ally, or creature, you  
can’t target yourself unless it is explicitly stated that you can also  
be a target.

##### Special Cases

Here are rules for special situations involving movement and melee.

###### Allies

Powers and spells in various classes are written with the understanding  
that a character’s allies are the other PCs in the party with a possible  
addition for an animal companion. NPCs don’t count as allies for  
abilities that are counting the number of allies that meet certain  
conditions.

###### Ambushes and Surprise

In situations when one side ambushes or surprises the other, start by  
letting the ambushing side pick one creature who will start the ambush.  
Then roll initiative for all members of the ambushing side.

Only two creatures get to act in the ambush round: the nominated  
ambusher and their highest initiative ally. The GM can choose whether to  
advance the escalation die after the surprise round.

Then roll initiative for the side that got ambushed and play normal  
combat rounds.

###### Dicey Moves

If it’s questionable whether a character could execute a particularly  
interesting move during combat, make a skill check against the ability  
score that the action is going to use. Specify whether a background will  
help. The DC depends on the current environment and the dice tell the  
tale.

### Special Actions

Here are a few things you can do that are more involved than just moving  
or attacking.

#### Flying

Some classes have spells or talents that enable *flight*. The movement  
rules for *flight* are the same as for other movement, except that, as  
long as there is space available, you can fly over enemies you’re not  
engaged with without allowing them to take opportunity attacks against  
you. You can be intercepted only by other flyers that are already  
airborne.

The engagement and disengagement rules are also the same when flyers  
make melee attacks against enemies on the ground. The player may choose  
to swoop past another flyer, as part of another attack, instead of  
engaging it directly, at a -2 attack penalty.

#### Fight in Spirit

This is a special combat action that you can take when you are out of  
the fight altogether. Once a round you can specify how your character is  
still there “fighting in spirit” alongside the other party members. Come  
up with some story about what your character has done that could boost  
party morale. The GM may grant any ally a +1 bonus to attacks, Armor  
Class, Physical Defense, or Mental Defense. The first time each battle  
that someone fights in spirit may be a +2 bonus.

The bonus lasts one to two rounds. If the fight is still on and you have  
something else to add to the story, sell it to the GM.

If you’re still (even partly) in the fight, then you can’t fight in  
spirit.

#### Flee

Fleeing is a party action. On any PC’s turn, any player can propose that  
all the characters flee the fight. If all players agree, they  
successfully retreat, carrying any fallen heroes away with them. The  
party suffers a campaign loss. The point of this rule is to encourage  
daring attacks and to make retreating interesting on the level of story  
rather than tactics.

#### Rally

Once a battle, every PC can use a standard action to rally, spending one  
of their recoveries and regaining hit points they’ve lost in combat.  
(See Recoveries.)

If you want to rally again later in the same battle, make a normal save  
(11+). If you succeed, you can rally again that round using another  
standard action. If you fail the save, you can take your turn normally,  
but you can’t rally that round.

### Attacks

Most attacks follow the general attack rules, except as indicated below.

#### General Attack Rules

When you use an attack, you declare which attack you are using and pick  
its target or targets, then roll the d20 for each one to find out if you  
hit. The attack will indicate what happens to a target that you hit (and  
sometimes one that you miss).

##### Ranged Attacks

Any ranged attack (weapon, spell, power, ability, or whatever) draws  
opportunity attacks from enemies engaged with you that you don’t target  
with the attack.

##### Spell Attacks

Most spells draw opportunity attacks from enemies engaged with you, even  
the enemies you target with the spell. Close-quarters spells are the  
exception; they don’t draw opportunity attacks.

Like weapon attacks, you add your level to the attack roll for spell  
attacks, plus any magical implement or other bonuses you might have.

##### Target Hit Points

Some spells and effects target creatures with a certain number of hit  
points or less. The hit point value you use is based on current hit  
points, not starting hit points.

#### Crits

Every attack roll that is natural 20 is a crit (“critical hit”) for  
double damage.

##### Crit Effects

Standard crits deal double damage and, at the GM’s discretion, might  
entail some additional superior result.

If you manage to double your crit damage (through the effect of a  
talent, power, spell or other source), triple it instead. If you manage  
to double your triple damage, bump it up to quadruple, and so on.

##### Crit Range

Crit range is what you must roll to score a crit. The standard crit  
range is a natural 20. Some powers and spells expand your crit range.  
Each point of improvement drops the number needed to score a critical  
hit by 1.

#### Fumbles

Rolling a natural 1 has no effect on the target, not even miss damage.  
At the GM’s discretion, rolling a 1 while in a precarious position might  
entail a bad result for the attacker. You might also hit an ally if  
you’re shooting into melee.

#### Damage on Miss

By default, a miss deals no damage, though some attacks are an  
exception. These attacks specify what happens on a miss. Unless  
otherwise stated, damage modifiers do not apply to misses.

#### Flexible Attacks

*Flexible* attacks allow you choose your target first, make your attack  
roll, and then use the natural unmodified die result to determine which  
of your eligible flexible attacks to use. You still use the modified  
roll to determine whether or not you hit, but your flexible attacks  
trigger off the natural result on the die sitting in front of you.

You can only use one flexible attack at a time.

You can’t use a flexible attack when you make an opportunity attack.

If you have some attacks that are flexible and some that are not,  
declare whether you are making a flexible attack or a specific  
non-flexible attack before you roll.

#### Unarmed Attacks

To punch or kick, make a Strength attack with a –2 penalty (regardless  
of your class) against AC. If you hit, you deal 1d6 damage for every two  
levels you have, plus your Strength modifier. At odd levels, including  
1<sup>st</sup> level, use a d3. If you miss, no damage.

#### Two-Weapon Fighting

You fight as normal, generally using the weapon in your main hand to  
attack. If your attack roll is a natural 2, you can reroll the attack  
but must use the reroll.

You do not get an extra attack for fighting with two weapons.

Some classes (and class talents) provide other advantages when fighting  
with two weapons. Those classes still get to use this basic two-weapon  
advantage.

### Damage and Healing

Damage and healing affect hit points. Healing also involves  
*recoveries*.

#### Damage

Every creature has hit points. You slay enemies (or occasionally knock  
them out) at 0 hp. PCs at 0 hp begin using the Death and Dying rules.

#### Recoveries

Each PC starts the adventure with 8 or 9 recoveries, a stat that  
represents the PC’s ability to heal or bounce back from damage. Many  
healing spells and potions require you to use up a recovery. So does  
rallying during a battle.

When you use a recovery, regain lost hit points by rolling recovery dice  
equal to your level and adding your Constitution modifier. Your class  
indicates which recovery die to use.

At 5<sup>th</sup> level, double the bonus you get from your Con  
modifier. At 8<sup>th</sup> level, triple it.

If you perform an action that requires a recovery but have none left,  
you get half the healing you would otherwise get and take a –1 penalty  
to all defenses and attack rolls until your next full heal-up. This  
penalty stacks for each recovery used that you don’t possess.

#### Staggered

When you are reduced to half your hit points or fewer, you’re  
*staggered*. Some powers, spells, and monster interactions work  
differently when you are staggered.

In general, monsters become staggered when they take damage equal to  
half their hit points or more, but it’s up to the GM.

#### Unconscious

When you drop to 0 hp or below, you fall unconscious. You can’t take any  
actions until you’re conscious again, though you do make a death save at  
the start of each of your turns. (See Death and Dying.)

When monsters drop to 0 hp, it means they’ve been slain, unless the  
characters’ intent is to keep the monster alive and the attack seems  
like a potentially humane blow that could knock the monster unconscious  
instead.

### Death and Dying

When you drop to 0 hp or below, you fall unconscious and can’t take any  
actions (except to make death saves).

To make a death save, roll a d20 at the start of your turn. If you roll  
16+, use a recovery to return to consciousness and heal up to the number  
of hit points you rolled with your recovery. If you roll a natural 20,  
you get to take actions normally that turn. If you roll 15 or less, you  
take one step toward the grave. After the fourth failed death save in a  
single battle, you die.

You also die when you reach negative hit points equal to half your  
maximum hit points.

If you’re able to use one of your recoveries (or otherwise get healed)  
while you are dying, ignore your current negative hit points. Start from  
0 and add the hit points you’ve regained.

If one of your allies is unconscious and you don’t have magic to heal  
them, you can still stabilize them to keep them from dying. Get next to  
them and make a DC 10 healing skill check using Wisdom as a standard  
action. Failure wastes your standard action, but doesn’t hurt your  
friend. Success stabilizes your ally. If your stabilization check is  
25+, you treat their wounds so quickly that it only takes a quick  
action; you can use your standard action normally that turn.

A stabilized character is still unconscious, rolling death saves on  
their turn, but failed death saves no longer take them a step closer to  
death. Ignore failed death saves while stabilized.

Feeding a dying character a healing potion gets them conscious and back  
on their feet, but always takes a standard action.

#### Optional Lasting-Wound Rule

If you’re dropped to 0 hp or below one or more times during a fight, you  
take a lasting-wound. Each lasting-wound reduces your maximum hp by an  
amount equal to 2 + your level. Lasting-wounds are cumulative.  
*Staggered* is still half or less of your maximum hit points. A full  
heal-up removes all lasting-wounds.

#### Optional Meaningful Death Rule

PCs can only be fully slain by named villains. PCs who fail four death  
checks fall into a coma and can only be brought back to consciousness  
once they’re fully out of danger.

### Rest and Recharge

After each battle, you can use a quick rest to get ready for the next  
battle. After four battles, you’ll usually earn a full heal-up.

#### Quick Rests

When you take a quick rest, you can choose to heal yourself by using as  
many recoveries as you have available.

If you are staggered when you take a quick rest, you must try to heal  
yourself, either with a recovery or from a spell that provides some true  
healing.

For each recharge power that you used in the last battle, roll a d20 to  
see if you keep the power for your next battle or lose it until after  
your next battle. You have to roll the power’s recharge value or higher  
to use it again.

#### Full Heal-ups

After approximately four battles, characters earn a full heal-up, though  
the exact number is determined by the GM. Tougher battle can mean more  
frequent heal-ups, and vice versa.

After a full heal-up, your hit points reset to full. You regain any  
recoveries you’ve used. All expended powers are regained or recharged.  
(“Daily” powers are actually “per heal-up.”)

If the party is short of a heal-up but is too beat up to press on, they  
can retreat and take a full heal-up, which entails a campaign loss. (See  
Flee.)

### Combat Modifiers

The universal combat modifier is +2 when you have advantageous  
circumstances. Similarly, –2 is the right penalty for adverse  
situations.

#### Shooting into Melee

When using a ranged attack to target an enemy that is engaged with one  
or more of your allies and you fumble (roll a 1), reroll that attack  
considering the engaged ally as the target. If there are multiple  
allies, the GM rules which ally is the target.

#### Invisibility

Invisibility grants a big modifier to any stealth skill checks—at least  
+5 unless you’re dealing with creatures who can detect you without  
sight.

Once engaged in battle, attacks against invisible enemies have a 50%  
chance to miss completely, before the attack roll. Attacks that miss in  
this fashion don’t deal any damage or have effects on the invisible  
creature, though other effects on a miss might occur.
