<%* let alias = tp.file.title.split('-').join(' '); %>---
ac: 
aliases: 
created: 2023-05-07
description: 
hp: 
image: 
level: 
modifier: 
publish: 
updated: 2023-05-08
---

## Eidolon

As a free action each round, an eidolon can use one of the three  
following abilities, which to them are as natural as breathing is to  
mortals. (GMs, due to these special abilities, eidolons are especially  
deadly when they have allies.) When including eidolons in battles, you  
don’t need to (and probably shouldn’t!) use these abilities all the  
time; they’re better as a nasty surprise.

*Split reality:* The eidolon splits the party into different realities.  
Each player rolls a d4 for their character. That PC can only perceive  
and interact with the eidolon and with other characters who rolled the  
same number. That means PCs in different realities can’t communicate or  
affect each other in any way. For the rest of the battle, each player  
rolls a d4 at the start of the round to see which reality their  
character is now in. At the start of each round, the eidolon can choose  
which version(s) of reality its allies are in.

*Warp time:* At the start of each round two combatants swap places in  
the initiative order as determined by the eidolon. Alternately, the  
eidolon warps the momentum of the battle and the escalation die value is  
determined at the start of the round with a d6 roll.

*Reshuffle space:* The eidolon swaps the position of two creatures in  
the battle at the start of the round. Alternately, if you are using  
minis and some sort of map tiles you can rearrange the tiles with the  
minis still on them.

Finally, all eidolons have the following ability, which plays well with  
the “recurring enemy” story.

*Undying:* When an eidolon drops to 0 hp it becomes discorporate. The  
eidolon isn’t dead, just gone. It has lost its link to or focus upon the  
time and place where the adventurers are. If adventurers drive off an  
eidolon repeatedly it will probably just stay away. Eidolons can be  
vindictive and hold grudges, but they have many possible worlds to  
interact with and if a mortal proves too troublesome the eidolon will  
move on. In general eidolons need defeating on three separate occasions  
to convince them to stay away forever.
