<%* let alias = tp.file.title.split('-').join(' '); %>---
ac: 
aliases: ["<% alias %>"]
created: 2023-05-07
description: 
hp: 
image: 
level: 
modifier: 
publish: 
tags: []
updated: 2023-05-08
---

## Iconic Eidolon

While guardian-form eidolons seem attracted to the service of the  
Religious Icon, eidolons can end up allied with any icon that serves the  
same interests as they do.

Eidolons who act in the interests of an icon have unusual weaknesses and  
strengths related to that icon, eidolons usually call icon-related  
oddities ‘iconic tests’. How much of these icon-related ‘tests’ are due  
to the eidolons being mythically linked to an icon and how much is a  
role that the eidolon is playing is left to you as the GM to decide.

Eidolons usually go out of their way to reveal any weaknesses they have  
as part of their ‘test’ of mortals.

**Magic Icon**—Wizard spells do double damage against the eidolon (crits  
do triple). Wizard spells used creatively against the eidolon have  
additional effects depending on the whim of the GM.

**Zealous Icon**—The eidolons’ attacks do double damage against those  
who have positive relationships with the Demonic Icon and sorcerers with  
the infernal heritage talent.

**Demonic Icon**—If you are willing to owe a mystically-enforced favor  
to the Demonic Icon, you can make this eidolon weakened (–4 attack and  
defenses) until the end of your turn.

**Underground Icon**—The eidolon does double damage against those using  
magical items, unless they have recently tithed to the Underground Icon.

**Graceful Icon**—The eidolon takes double damage from attacks made by  
bards, and attacks made using bows (but not from crossbows, which do  
their normal damage).

**Leader Icon**—Adventurers who fight side-by-side with each other (or  
back-to-back) gain +2 to all their defenses while doing so.

**Protector Icon**—Attacks by dragonics, breath weapons, and attacks  
from sorcerers with the metallic protector heritage talent deal double  
damage to this eidolon.

**Nature Icon**—The eidolon takes double damage from animal companions,  
and from druids in beast form. Plants near this eidolon grow more  
verdantly, flowers blooming in its presence.

**Undead Icon**—Spend a recovery to weaken (–4 attack and defense) the  
eidolon until the end of your turn. Well, we say ‘spend’ but what you  
are actually doing is sacrificing a sliver of your life-energy to the  
Undead Icon.

**Brute Icon**—If the attacker subtracts a die from their damage dice  
before rolling them, it takes double damage. The extra die of damage  
must be used to harm something or somebody relating to cities or  
civilization (instead of rolling 3d8 damage you’d roll 2d8x2 damage, and  
deal 1d8 damage to a window, book, mayor, etc.). The GM and player  
should work together to determine what a ‘die of damage’ means to  
whatever is getting smashed or slashed as part of the attack.

**Religious Icon**—If since the start of the Eidolon’s last turn, any  
adventurer has received healing from somebody who has a positive or  
conflicted relationship with the Religious Icon, then the Eidolon is  
dazed (–4 attack) until the end of its next turn.

**Trickster Icon**—Sneak attack damage dice for attacks against this  
eidolon are two die types higher (1d4 becomes 1d8, 2d6 becomes 2d10,  
etc.). Rogues can shadow walk without needing to make a roll first.

**Draconic Icon**—This eidolon takes double damage from poison,  
lightning, or fire attacks, as well as from attacks from sorcerers with  
the chromatic destroyer heritage talent deal double damage to this  
eidolon.
