## Hag

Hags get two of the following abilities, and a single death curse.

<u>Hag Abilities: Choose TWO</u>

**Adept Illusionist:** The hag gains a +5 bonus to initiative checks due  
to being not quite where she seems.

*Hag ability:* As a distraction, the hag creates an illusion of her  
doing one thing, when she is in fact setting a trap. The hag throws out  
a bear-trap or other impediment and one nearby enemy becomes stuck (save  
ends). While stuck this way, the target takes 6 damage at the start of  
each of its turns.

**Another skin:** On the hag’s first round of combat each battle, she  
gains a +2 attack bonus due to her victims being shocked as she bursts  
out of her false outer skin.

*Hag ability:* The hag coughs up a glob of liquid pseudo-flesh that  
globs onto a nearby enemy (no attack roll). The glob solidifies causing  
an effect of the hag’s choice: the target is stuck (save ends); OR the  
target is unable to cast spells during its next turn (the pseudo-flesh  
covers their mouth and face).

**Blood pact:** Each creature allied to the hag through a pact gains a  
+2 bonus with their first attack each battle if the hag is present.

*Hag ability:* The hag spits blood in the face of the target and makes a  
command. The target must roll an immediate save; on a failure, as a free  
action it makes basic attack against an ally or against itself (target’s  
choice).

**Breath stealing:** The hag starts combat with 10 temporary hit points.

*Hag ability:* The hag steals a recovery from the target and heals 20  
hp.

**Death shriek:** When a melee attack hits the hag, she lets out a  
shriek as a free action and the attacker takes 2d4 thunder damage.

*Hag ability:* The hag begins to shriek, and each enemy in the battle  
takes a –4 attack penalty with spells until the start of her next turn.

**Dusk walk:** Once per day the hag can implant a suggestion in the mind  
of a target sleeping within a day’s travel of her. The hag rolls an  
attack: **+10 vs. MD**; on a hit, she implants a suggestion in the  
target that they must obey when a condition she chooses is met.  
Suggested actions can’t cause direct harm (the target can’t be forced to  
fight another or harm themselves), can be no longer than 12 words, and  
affects the target for a week or until triggered. GM keeps the roll  
hidden.

*Hag ability:* The hag becomes immaterial, pops free from all enemies  
engaged with her, and enters the land of dreams, re-appearing next to  
any nearby conscious creature (or a nearby or faraway creature that is  
unconscious). The hag then makes the following attack: **C: +10 vs. MD  
(each nearby unconscious enemy)**—The hag implants a suggestion in the  
target that they must obey when they become conscious (usually “When you  
awake, flee this fight and discard your equipment.”) Suggested actions  
can’t cause direct harm. The round after the target acts on the  
implanted suggestion it can start rolling normal saves to throw off the  
effect.

**Fateful visions:** The hag uses a +2 magical weapon traded to her for  
her services (she gains a +2 bonus to attack and damage with melee  
attacks).

*Hag ability:* The hag has seen this fight in a vision. Her crit range  
expands by 2 until the end of the battle. Each increase is cumulative.

**Foul-touched:** When an enemy is battling the hag, at the start of  
each of its turns, it takes 2d6 psychic damage from the horror of the  
hag’s visage unless it takes precautions to avoid directly glancing at  
her terrible face (mirror, blindfold, etc., which might cause attack  
penalties).

*Hag ability:* The hag chooses a nearby enemy and glares at it. That  
target must roll an immediate save; on a failure, the target is stricken  
blind by her ugliness. While blinded this way, the target is hampered,  
weakened, and can’t make ranged attacks. The target can end the effect  
by splashing liquid into their eyes or using a similar act to clear the  
ugly out as a standard action.

**Song of dreams:** Enemies take a –4 penalty to their initiative rolls  
in battles with the hag.

*Hag ability:* The hag begins to sing and the two enemies closest to her  
(even if faraway) must roll an immediate save; on a failure, the target  
is dazed (save ends). If the dazed target fails its first save, instead  
it’s weakened (save ends). If the weakened target fails its second save,  
instead it’s helpless (save ends).

**Thief of mist:** The hag ignores opportunity attacks and can’t be  
intercepted while moving.

*Hag ability:* The hag becomes a mist until the start of her next turn.  
While a mist, only spells cast with a +3 implement and attacks using a  
+3 magical weapon can harm her. (Some special story item might also  
allow attacks to hit if no PC has a +3 item.)

**Twist the path:** Once per day the hag can enspell an area to attract  
visitors, causing those traveling nearby to get lost and wander to that  
location. Alternately, the hag can cause the location to repel visitors.  
Finding the correct path to that location requires a DC 20 check if it  
is a familiar place, a DC 25 check if the travelers only have a map or  
guide, or a DC 30 check if the travelers are unfamiliar with the area.

*Hag ability:* The target is also confused (easy save ends, 6+).

**Weakening touch:** Each enemy fighting the hag must roll a normal save  
at the start of the battle; on a failure, that creature starts the  
battle weakened (easy save ends, 6+).

*Hag ability:* The target is dazed (save ends). If the dazed target  
fails its first save, instead it’s weakened (save ends). When the target  
saves against this effect, it takes a –2 attack penalty until the end of  
its next turn.

**Winter breath:** The hag’s attacks deal cold damage.

*Hag ability:* The target takes 6 ongoing cold damage.

<u>Death Curses: Create ONE</u>

When a hag dies she curses the one who killed her. The only known way to  
remove the curse is to seek the aid of another hag, though there may be  
some ways to end such a curse that are not readily known.

Create one curse per hag. A good curse makes life horribly weird for a  
character, but isn’t something that debilitates them. Avoid ones that  
blind, deafen, cripple, or mute characters. Odd habits, ugly features,  
unusual smells, strange and disgusting diets—all these are good. They  
should make the character and the story more interesting.

