<%* let alias = tp.file.title.split('-').join(' '); %>---
ac: 
aliases: ["<% alias %>"]
created: 2023-05-07
description: 
hp: 
image: 
level: 
modifier: 
publish: 
tags: [13A/Bestiary/Aberration]
updated: 2023-05-08
---

## Star-Mask Host Template

Star-mask cultists can range from those who are simple followers who are  
unaware of the cult’s true purpose, to fully controlled puppets, to  
individuals who welcome their star-mask “partners.”

A star-mask brute normally begins life as a large beast or a dragon, but  
becomes host to dozens of star-masks. The star-masks warp and mutate  
their host, and eventually it is no longer recognizable.

To convert a regular monster or NPC to a star-mask host, give it a  
couple abilities from those listed under psychic powers, physical  
warping, and tentacles. In addition, increase its attack bonus by +4.  
The base creature’s level increases by 1 for purposes of building  
battles.

<u>Psychic Powers</u>

The star-mask hosts have psychic powers granted to them by their  
symbiotic masks. Such hosts usually have some outward sign of their  
powers—swollen skulls or throbbing veins.

<u>Choose one or more of the following:</u>

**C: Dysthymic ray +5 + level vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**—10 psychic  
damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 30 damage)

*Natural 18+:* The target is confused (save ends) and any confusion  
effect from the ray on a previous target ends.

*Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.

*Group mind:* Provided there is a star-mask brain around (it doesn’t  
have to be in the fight, just in the general vicinity), the host gains a  
+4 bonus to MD and knows everything that the star-mask brain knows (and  
vise-versa). If there isn’t a star-mask brain in the area, the host only  
gains a +1 bonus to MD.

*Healed by the hive mind:* Once per battle as a standard action, the  
host heals 25% of its maximum hit points, as does one of its nearby  
allies.

*Hive mind puppet:* When an enemy drops to 0 hp or below, it must roll a  
save. If it fails, it’s “turned” to the star-masks’ side. A turned  
creature recovers during its next turn with temporary hp equal to its  
normal maximum hit points, but it’s now an ally of the star-masks (hard  
save ends, 16+). Once that creature saves and breaks free, it must roll  
a normal save. If it fails, it loses the temporary hit points.

**R: Psychic chains +5 + level vs. MD**—5 ongoing psychic damage  
(champion: 10 ongoing damage, epic: 20 ongoing damage)

*Aftereffect:* When the target saves against the ongoing damage, if the  
save was a natural odd roll, the target becomes confused until it hits  
an ally with an attack.

*Limited use:* 1/battle.

*Psychic illusion:* The host looks normal. It requires a DC 30 skill  
check to notice things like tentacles or bulging muscles on it. If a  
creature’s MD is 17 or less, it won’t even notice the mask itself.

*Telekinetic flight:* The host can fly. When an enemy misses the host  
with an attack and rolls a natural 1–5, it pops free from that enemy.

**C: Woe betide you +5 + level vs. MD (one nearby enemy)**—10 psychic  
damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 35 damage), and the target can’t heal  
using a recovery (save ends)

*Limited use:* 1/battle.

<u>Physical Enhancements</u>

The star-mask host has been physically enhanced by the star-mask.  
Hunched and twisted forms or skin split open over bulging red muscles  
are common side effects. The greater the physical enhancements the more  
brutish and less intelligent the host becomes (and the easier for the  
star-mask to influence).

<u>Choose one or more of the following:</u>

*Amazing endurance:* The host gains +2 AC and +1 PD, or double that  
bonus while it is defending a star-mask brain.

*Leap:* Once per battle when the escalation die is even, the host can  
pop free from all enemies and leap somewhere nearby or far away as a  
move action. If the host engages an enemy with this movement and  
attacks, it gains a +1 bonus to that attack.

*Trampling charge:* As a standard action, the host moves through an  
enemy’s space without taking an opportunity attack and finishes its move  
out of engagement, making the following attack against that enemy.

**Trample +5 + level vs. AC**—10 damage (champion: 20 damage; epic: 40  
damage)

*Natural even miss:* Half damage.

*Natural even hit:* The target pops free from the host and is hurled far  
away from the host.

<u>Tentacles</u>

The star-mask grips to its host with tentacles, but this star-mask has  
gone further than that.

<u>Choose one or more of the following:</u>

*Barbed tentacles:* Enemies that pop free of the host or move away from  
it without first disengaging take 10 damage.

*Climbing tentacles:* The host can climb up walls and across ceilings as  
easily as it moves on the ground.

*Grasping tentacles:* Enemies engaged with the host must roll twice for  
disengage checks and take the lowest result.

*Tentacles everywhere:* If the star-mask host is intercepted, it can  
make a *probing tentacles* attack as a free action.

**C: Probing tentacles +5 + level vs. PD (an enemy intercepting  
it)**—The enemy becomes stuck and takes 5 ongoing poison damage (save  
ends both) (champion: 10 ongoing damage; epic: 20 ongoing damage)

*Target dies while still stuck:* If a creature dies while stuck in the  
tentacles, the host lays 1d4 star-mask eggs in it, which hatch into  
scuttling star-masks after 1d3 – 1 rounds (0 rounds mean the eggs hatch  
almost instantly).

**R: Whipping tentacles +5 + level vs. AC**—10 damage (champion: 20  
damage; epic: 35 damage)

*Quick use:* 1/round, as a quick action.
