<%* let alias = tp.file.title.split('-').join(' '); %>---
ac: 
aliases: 
created: 2023-05-08
description: 
hp: 
image: 
level: 
modifier: 
publish: 
updated: 2023-05-08
---

## Drow

Drow may optionally include one of these abilities as nastier specials:  
*Drow Cruelty* or *Poisons and Potions*.

<u>Drow Cruelty</u>

Choose one of the following abilities for all non-mook drow in a battle  
to have:

*Poisoner:* When the drow scores a critical hit, it can forego damage to  
force the target to start making last gasp saves. On the fourth failure,  
the target falls unconscious (and can’t be woken normally) for 2d4  
minutes.

*Take advantage of weakness:* Whenever an enemy nearby a drow rolls a  
save, it takes its level in damage.

*Umbral caul:* As long as at least one drow uses a standard action each  
round to maintain the supernatural darkness, each non-drow creature in  
the battle becomes dazed (save ends) whenever it rolls a natural 1–5  
with an attack roll.

*Venomous:* The first time each battle a drow hits with a weapon attack,  
the target also takes 5 ongoing poison damage.

<u>Poisons and Potions</u>

Drinking a potion, applying a poison, or using a substance requires only  
a quick action for a drow with one of these options. Characters who  
acquire any of these drow items must use a standard action to  
drink/apply them.

*Draft of Eschaton* (potion): When drunk it immediately purges the body  
of all poisons and toxins and ends any ongoing conditions. All the  
drinker’s saves (including last gasp saves and death saves)  
automatically succeed for the rest of the battle or for five minutes.  
Immediately after the battle, the drinker must make a DC 30 Constitution  
check or be completely debilitated and unable to travel far or to fight  
for a day.

*Dragon Apples:* Small ceramic spheres that explode. Make a basic ranged  
attack against a nearby enemy (or level + 5 for drow); on a hit, the  
target takes 10 ongoing fire damage.

*Midnight Tincture:* When this glass vial is broken, the nearby area is  
shrouded in clinging darkness. The darkness lasts 3 rounds. Each  
creature in the darkness except drow takes a –4 attack penalty. The  
tincture can be attached to an arrow or bolt.

*Potion of Spider Climbing:* For one battle or five minutes the drinker  
can climb on ceilings and walls as easily as it moves on the ground.

*Spider Venom:* A creature hit by a melee weapon coated in the venom  
takes 5 ongoing poison damage when the attack roll is a natural 16+.

*Web Dust:* Made from desiccated spiders, this dust can hold a door shut  
or stick an object to a wall for five minutes. Champion-tier creatures  
can make a DC 20 skill check to rip through something held by *web dust*  
before it fully dissolves, and epic-tier creatures can rip through such  
objects in a round. Further applications increase the effectiveness:  
three applications lasts for fifteen minutes, requires 3 successful  
checks, and takes 3 rounds for epic-tier characters to get through.
