<%* let alias = tp.file.title.split('-').join(' '); %>---
ac: 
aliases: ["<% alias %>"]
created: 2023-05-07
description: 
hp: 
image: 
level: 
modifier: 
publish: 
tags: []
updated: 2023-05-08
---

## Frogspawn Spellcroaker

<table>
<colgroup>
<col style="width: 16%" />
<col style="width: 71%" />
<col style="width: 5%" />
<col style="width: 6%" />
</colgroup>
<tbody>
<tr class="odd">
<td><p>Normal</p>
<p>4<sup>th</sup> level</p>
<p>Leader</p>
<p>Humanoid</p></td>
<td><p>Initiative: +8</p>
<p><strong>Frogspear +9 vs. AC</strong>—13 damage</p>
<p><strong>R: Curseblast +9 vs. MD (one nearby or faraway
enemy)</strong>—13 damage, and if a target is staggered by this attack,
the spellcroaker may make another <em>curseblast</em> attack immediately
against a different target</p>
<p><strong>C: Eruption of Frogs +9 vs. PD (all engaged
enemies)</strong>—15 ongoing poison damage, and the target pops free of
the spellcroaker</p>
<p><em>Limited use:</em> 1/battle</p>
<p><em>Croaking chorus:</em> At the start of each round, all
spellcroakers in a battle start to croak together in chorus. This
imposes a special bonus or penalty depending on the croak generated by
the chorus that round (roll 1d6).</p>
<p><em>1-2: Croak of Dismay:</em> If the number of spellcroakers is
equal to or greater than the value of the escalation die, then the
player characters do not get the benefit of the escalation die, but all
frogs and frogfolk may add the value of the escalation die to their
attack rolls instead.</p>
<p><em>3–4: Croak of Victory:</em> All attacks by frogfolk gain a bonus
to damage equal to the number of croakers.</p>
<p><em>5-6: Croak of Choking:</em> Over the course of the round, you may
force the player characters to reroll a number of d20 rolls (attack
rolls, saving throws, skill checks, death saves) equal to the number of
croakers.</p>
<p>When a spellcroaker drops to 0 hit points, roll a d20—on a 11+, the
remaining spellcroakers maintain the <em>croaking chorus</em> for the
rest of the round. Otherwise, the chorus effect is cancelled for the
rest of that round.</p>
<p><u>Nastier Specials</u></p>
<p><em>Croakmaster:</em> This spellcroaker counts as two spellcroakers
for the purposes of the <em>croaking chorus</em>.</p>
<p><em>Frog Curse:</em> If a spellcroaker rolls a natural 18+ when using
a curse, the target is transformed into a steadily shrinking frog-like
humanoid and is hampered and weakened (save ends all effects). If the
curse somehow ran its full course, the target would no doubt shrink down
into a frog, but PCs are made of strong stuff and should be able to
evade a fate that might affect common folk.</p></td>
<td><p><strong>AC</strong></p>
<p><strong>PD</strong></p>
<p><strong>MD</strong></p>
<p><strong>HP</strong></p></td>
<td><p>18</p>
<p>19</p>
<p>17</p>
<p>50</p></td>
</tr>
<tr class="even">
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
<td></td>
</tr>
</tbody>
</table>
