---
aliases: []
created: 2023-05-13
description: 
image: 
publish: 
tags: [13A/Combat/Rules/Special-Attacks]
updated: 2023-05-13
---

## Special Attacks and Effects

### Coup De Grace

When you attack a helpless enemy you’re engaged with, you score an  
automatic critical hit if you follow these three steps:

- Skip your move action and your quick action that turn.

- Make a standard action attack on your turn against the helpless enemy  
  you are engaged with.

- Your attack only targets the helpless enemy, even if the attack would  
  normally target multiple creatures.

### Grabbed

Some monsters grab you. Generally they grab you after a successful hit.  
A creature can let go of a creature it is grabbing as a free action.

When you’re grabbed you are engaged with the creature grabbing you and  
you can’t move away unless you teleport, somehow pop free first, or  
successfully disengage. Disengage checks take a –5 penalty unless you  
hit the creature that is grabbing you the same turn that you’re trying  
to disengage.

If you are smaller than the creature that is grabbing you, it can move  
and carry you along with no problem. If you are the same size or larger,  
it has to let go of you if it wants to move.

Grabbed creatures can’t make opportunity attacks. That also applies if  
the creature grabbing you decides to let go and move away from you; it  
doesn’t have to disengage or take an opportunity attack from you, it  
just leaves you behind.

Grabbed creatures can’t use ranged attacks, although melee and close  
attacks are fine.

The creature grabbing you gets a +4 attack bonus against you.

### Ongoing Damage

A creature (including PCs) taking ongoing damage takes that damage at  
the end of its turn immediately before it rolls its save (11+ unless  
otherwise specified) against that ongoing damage. Success with the save  
means the creature won’t take the damage again; failure means the effect  
will be repeated at the end of the creature’s next turn.

Once a battle is over, the PCs automatically make their next saves.

### Saves

The save mechanic, a d20 roll with no standard modifiers, handles  
everything from power recharge to saves against power effects to death  
saves. There are three difficulty values for saves. If a save doesn’t  
specify what type it is, it’s a normal save: 11+.

- **Easy:** Roll 6+ on a d20

- **Normal:** Roll 11+ on a d20

- **Hard:** Roll 16+ on a d20

There are no standard bonuses to saves, but there are occasional  
talents, feats, and magic items that provide small bonuses to saves.

### Resistance

Resistance to types of damage is rated as a number corresponding to the  
attacker’s natural d20 roll. The higher the number, the more resistance  
you have.

When an attack with a damage type you are resistant to targets you, the  
natural attack roll must equal or exceed your resistance number to deal  
full damage. If the roll is lower than your resistance, the attack deals  
half damage.

If you take ongoing damage of a type you resist, use the original attack  
roll to determine whether you take the full amount of ongoing damage or  
half the amount (rounded down).

Any creature with resistance to an energy type is immune to normal  
energy of that type. Magical attacks, magical weapons, and spells are  
different: the damage they do can get past the resistance. This  
resistance = immunity rule only applies to energy types, not to weapons.  
Weapon resistance does not mean immunity to non-magic weapons.

If there’s an automatic damage effect that feels like it should have a  
chance of being reduced by resistance, fake an attack roll to see if the  
effect penetrates resistance for full damage or only deals half.

### Situational Weapon Use

When the action in the story backs it up, at the GM’s discretion, a  
weapon’s normal dice can be swapped for bigger or smaller dice, letting  
the character roll the same damage dice of a larger or smaller weapon.  
This is an optional rule in for memorable situations.

### Teleportation

Teleportation is an effect by which a creature moves instantaneously  
from one location to another. Teleporting doesn’t draw opportunity  
attacks, but casting the spell may; spellcasting rules don’t change  
because you are casting a teleport spell.

### Temporary Hit Points

Temporary hit points are beneficial effect that keeps a character from  
harm. When you gain temporary hit points, keep track of them separately  
from your regular hit points. Temporary hit points don’t stack; when you  
gain more temporary hit points while you still have temporary hit points  
left, use only the higher amount and ignore the lower amount.

When you take damage, subtract it from your temporary hit points first,  
and only apply damage to your regular hit points after the temporary hit  
points are used up.

Temporary hit points reset to 0 after a battle and drop to 0 when you  
roll initiative.
